Chapter 1

Hepatitis B Virus Infection: Overview

Abstract Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a DNA virus, belonging to the Hepadnaviridae family. It is a partially double-stranded DNA virus with a small viral genome

. Chronic HBV infection remains a global public health problem. If left

untreated, chronic HBV infection can progress to end-stage liver disease, such as liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In recent years, tremendous

advances in the field of HBV basic and clinical research have been achieved, ranging from the HBV biological characteristics, immunopathogenesis, and animal

models to the development of new therapeutic strategies and new drugs against

HBV. In this overview, we begin with a brief history of HBV discovery and treat-

ment milestones. We then briefly summarize the HBV research advances, which

will be detailed in the following chapters.

1 Discovery of HBV

As early as the 1950s, clinicians observed the hepatitis that occurred after blood transfusion and proposed the concept of serum hepatitis [1]. In 1964, Blumberg and Alter collected blood samples from all over the world for the study of lipoprotein polymorphisms and serendipitously observed an unusual reaction between serum

from a transfused hemophilic patient and an Australian aborigine, and the new antigen was designated as the “Australian antigen” [2, 3]. By 1967, accumulating evi-dences from Blumberg’s group and other research groups showed a strong correlation between the presence of the Australian antigen and serum hepatitis [4–8]. In 1970, David Dane used electron microscope to inspect the isolated virus particles from

serum of patients with Australian antigen-associated hepatitis and demonstrated the famous “Dane particles” as the complete virus (42 nm in diameter) [9]. The outer 

surface protein of the Dane particle is the Australian antigen, which was later offi-cially named by the World Health Organization (WHO) as the HBV surface antigen

(HBsAg). In 1976, Blumberg was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or

Medicine for his scientific achievement in the discovery of HBV and his visionary concept in developing the first generation of plasma-derived HBsAg vaccine. In

1979, Galibert completed the whole genome sequence of HBV and demonstrated it

as a partially double-stranded DNA virus with approximately 3200 base pairs of

nucleotides in length [10], thus setting the stage for the second generation of HBV

vaccine made from genetic engineering.

The development of HBV immunization began in 1971 by using HBV immuno-

globulins to prevent HBV infection. In 1978, the efficacy of the first generation of HBV vaccine consisting of HBsAg particles made from the plasma of HBV carriers

was successfully validated in clinical trials [11]. In 1979–1982, using modern

molecular cloning methods, William Rutter cloned the HBsAg gene in Escherichia coli ( E. coli) to express the HBsAg protein [12], thus opening the door for recombinant HBV vaccine [13]. Subsequently, the HBsAg gene was successfully trans-ferred to yeast for the mass production of HBsAg as HBV vaccine [14]. In 1984, the yeast-expressed HBsAg vaccine prepared by Merck company was used to vaccinate

chimpanzees, demonstrating that the vaccinated chimpanzees were totally protected from intravenous HBV challenge of human serum source [15]. Subsequently, the yeast-expressed HBsAg vaccine was approved by the US Food and Drug

Administration (FDA) in 1986. In 1989, Dr. Roy Vagelos, on the behalf of Merck,

provided all the technology needed to manufacture HBV vaccine to China with the

largest burden of HBV infection. In 1991, HBV vaccine was incorporated into the

neonatal immunization program by WHO, which significantly reduced the global

HBV infection rate. Since 1992, HBV vaccination has been incorporated into the

national routine immunization program by the Chinese government, which led to a

markedly decline of HBV infection in China.

HBsAg is the most important marker for the diagnosis of HBV infection. Since

the discovery of the “Australian antigen” by Blumberg, a variety of HBsAg qualitative detection methods have been developed, from the detection of HBsAg by

immunoelectrophoresis in the 1960s to the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in

the 1980s. Quantitative detection of HBsAg was introduced as early as in the 1990s, but fully automated and high-throughput quantitative assays have only been recently available. Serum HBsAg quantification not only serves as a useful test in clinical practice to define the specific immunological conditions of the single HBV carrier during the dynamic natural history of HBV infection but also a prediction marker of virological response to antiviral therapy and long-term prognosis [16, 17]. In addition to HBsAg, other commonly used HBV serum markers include anti-HBs,

HBeAg and anti-HBe, and anti-HBc. HBV nucleic acid detection is mainly to detect

HBV DNA level. HBV DNA testing has also undergone a process from qualitative

to quantitative testing. The most widely used HBV DNA quantification method is

the real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method. Serum HBV DNA levels

reflect the viral replication, and monitoring HBV DNA levels during treatment

allows evaluation of antiviral therapy effect.





1 Hepatitis B Virus Infection: Overview


In the 1990s, interferon-α was approved by the US FDA for the treatment of

HBV infection, marking the treatment of HBV infection into the era of antiviral

therapy [18]. In the late 1990s, lamivudine became the first nucleos(t)ide analog (NA) approved for anti-HBV treatment, representing the treatment of HBV infection into the era of NAs [19]. At the beginning of the twenty-first century, the long-acting pegylated IFN (Peg-IFN) and the potent and low-resistant NAs entecavir

(ETV) and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) were approved for HBV treatment

[18]. Long-term antiviral treatment with full suppression of serum HBV DNA to undetectable levels not only halts hepatic inflammation but also decreases the incidence of liver cirrhosis and HCC.

2 Epidemiology and Natural History of HBV Infection

HBV infection remains the most common chronic viral infection in the world.

WHO estimates that globally, 2 billion people have been infected with HBV. In

2015, an estimated 257 million persons, or 3.5% of the world population, were liv-

ing with chronic HBV infection [20]. About 887,000 people die each year from HBV-related liver disease with approximately half coming from China. In 2006, the epidemiology serosurvey of HBV in China revealed that the prevalence of HBsAg

for population aged 1–59 years was 7.18% [21, 22]. Based on this calculation, there

were about 93 million HBsAg carriers in China, of which approximately 20 million

are chronic hepatitis B (CHB) patients [23]. The latest epidemiological data showed that the estimated national HBsAg prevalence in the general population was 6.1%

in 2016 [24].

The natural history of HBV infection depends on the interaction among the virus

replication and evolution, the host immune response, and the environment factors.

The age at which HBV is infected is the most important factor affecting chronicity.

The risks of progression from acute to chronic HBV infection are approximately

95% if the infection occurs during the perinatal period, 20%–30% in children aged 1–5 years, and less than 5% in adults. The natural history of chronic HBV infection can be characterized into four phases: (1) immune-tolerant phase, (2) HBeAg-positive immune-active phase, (3) inactive CHB phase, and (4) HBeAg-negative

immune reactivation phase [25, 26]. In the immune-tolerant phase, the HBV-

infected subjects are characterized by high levels of HBV DNA, positive HBeAg,

but normal ALT levels and the absence of significant inflammation or fibrosis in the liver. HBV-infected subjects in this phase can be defined as HBV carriers. In the HBeAg-positive immune-active phase, the HBV-infected patients are characterized

by elevated ALT and HBV DNA levels together with liver injury by liver histology, and therefore, those patients are defined as HBeAg-positive CHB patients [27]. The transition from the immune-active phase to the immune-inactive phase is reflected by the seroconversion from HBeAg to antibody to HBeAg (anti-HBe), the normal

ALT levels, and the low or undetectable HBV DNA levels. However, around

10–30% of those patients who have HBeAg seroconversion continue to have

elevated ALT and high HBV DNA levels and, therefore, are defined as HBeAg-

negative CHB patients [27]. Most of these patients have mutations in the pre-core or core promoter region. Patients with sustained liver injury and persistent HBV replication are prone to develop liver cirrhosis and HCC.

HBV infection not only leads to acute and chronic hepatitis but also is one of the most important etiological factors for liver cirrhosis and HCC. In the absence of antiviral treatment, the annual incidence of liver cirrhosis in CHB patients is 2–10%

[28], the annual risk of progression from compensated to decompensated cirrhosis

is 3–5%, and the 5-year survival rate in patients with decompensated cirrhosis is only 14%–35% [29]. The annual incidence of HCC in non-cirrhotic patients is

about 0.5%–1.0% [29], whereas in cirrhotic patients, the annual incidence of HCC

increases to 3–6% [28, 30, 31]. Liver cirrhosis has been classified by WHO as one of the top 10 causes of death in low-middle-income countries, and HCC as one of

the top 10 causes of death in upper-middle-income countries [32].

3 Biological Characteristics and Immunopathogenesis

of HBV

3.1 HBV Genome and Life Cycle

HBV particles are composed of the HBV genome, nucleocapsid, and the envelope

proteins. The HBV genome is a partially double-stranded DNA with approximately

3200 base pairs. The longer-strand DNA is complementary to pregenomic RNA

(pgRNA) and therefore is designated as minus (−) strand, whereas the shorter strand is designated as plus (+) strand. The (−) strand contains four overlapping open read-ing frames (ORFs) (PreC/C, P, PreS/S, and X). Under the joint regulation of the four promoters (the core promoter, the PreS1 promoter, the PreS2/S promoter, and the X

promoter) and two enhancers (EnhI and EnhII), four distinct classes of HBV tran-

scripts are transcribed: the 3.5 kb PreC/C mRNA, the 2.4 kb PreS1 mRNA, the

2.1 kb PreS2/S mRNA, and the 0.7 kb X mRNA. The PreC/C ORF is responsible

for encoding HBeAg and HBcAg; the P ORF encodes the HBV DNA polymerase;

the PreS/S ORF encodes the large (L), the middle (M), and the small (S) envelope

proteins; and the X ORF is responsible for encoding the X protein (HBx).

The life cycle of HBV involves the viral entry into host cells; rcDNA’s entry into the nucleus to form cccDNA; the expressions of viral RNAs and proteins; viral

capsid assembly; reverse transcription and rcDNA formation; and, finally, viral

packaging, maturation, and budding. Mediated by the antigenic loop (AGL) present

in the S domain of HBsAg, HBV is initially attached to heparan sulfate proteogly-

can (HSPG) on the surface of hepatocyte membrane [33]. Subsequently, through the preS1 region of the L protein, HBV is tightly bound to the sodium-taurocholate

cotransporting polypeptide (NTCP) on the surface of hepatocytes [34, 35]. After HBV entry into the hepatocytes, the nucleocapsid is released, and the rcDNA of





1 Hepatitis B Virus Infection: Overview

HBV enters the nucleus to form cccDNA, which resides inside the hepatocyte as a

microchromosome [36]. Current anti-HBV NAs have no direct effect on cccDNA, which explains why HBV infection is currently manageable but still incurable by

current treatments. Under the action of host RNA polymerase II, cccDNA serves as

the template for transcription of the abovementioned four HBV transcripts and the translation of seven viral proteins. Of note, in addition to encode the translation of HBcAg, HBeAg, and DNA polymerase, the 3.5 kb pgRNA also has an important

function as a template for viral reverse transcription and replication. During viral replication, HBV DNA polymerase binds to the ε-stem-loop structure near the 5’

end of the pgRNA, forming a specific pgRNA-polymerase ribonucleoprotein (RNP)

complex, which is encapsulated by the core antigen polypeptide dimer to form an

immature nucleocapsid [37]. Under the catalysis of HBV DNA polymerase in the nucleocapsid, the 3.5 kb pregenomic RNA serves as the template for reverse transcription of the (−) strand DNA, which subsequently serves as the template for the synthesis of the (+) strand DNA, thus forming the progeny rcDNA. The recycling of the de novo synthesized rcDNA into the nucleus makes more cccDNA, maintaining

the cccDNA reservoir. Double-stranded linear (dsl) DNA may be generated due to

erroneous viral DNA replication [38]. Mature nucleocapsid and envelope protein aggregate in the endoplasmic reticulum to complete the packaging, maturation, and viral budding [39]. The discovery of HSPG and NTCP and their crucial roles in HBV entry into hepatocytes and the immature nucleocapsid containing the pgRNA

and the dslDNA has significantly advanced our understanding of the HBV life cycle.

3.2 HBV Transcription and Translation

Using the reporter gene system containing the HBV promoter, a series of cis-acting transcriptional regulatory sequence elements and trans-acting DNA-binding proteins have been discovered. The 3.5 kb pgRNA is primarily regulated by cis-acting regulatory sequence elements within the HBV genomic enhancer I (EnhI/Xp) and

enhancer II (EnhII/Cp). HBV EnhI is located within the ORF P, between the ORF S

and X, and overlaps with the X promoter, which enhances the transcription of C,

SPI, SPII, and X promoters. The transcription factors reported bound to EnhI/Xp

include C/EBP, P53, IRF, NF1, HNF3, HNF4, RXR, PPAR, COUPTF, RFX1, AP1,

CREB, and ATF2 [40, 41]. EnhII is located to the upstream of Cp. The transcription factors bound to HBV EnhII/Cp include SP1, RFX1, C/EBP, FTF, HLF, E4BP4,

HNF4, HNF3, RXR, PPAR, COUPTF1, and ARP1 [40, 41].

HNF4, RXR, PPAR, FXR, and LRH1 are liver-enriched transcription factors

capable of supporting HBV replication in non-hepatoma cells [41, 42]. The identi-fication of these liver-enriched transcription factors contributes significantly to the hepatocyte-specific tropism of HBV. In addition to the transcription factors, some transcriptional co-activators (including PGC1, CBP, SRC1, and PRMT1) and co-repressors (including SBP) are also involved in the regulation of HBV transcription

and replication [43–45]. In addition, other host proteins including APOBEC3B, PRMT5, and PRKAA/AMPK have also been reported to participate in the HBV

transcription and replication [46–48].

The viral protein HBx can also act as a trans-acting factor possibly through interacting with certain host proteins to enhance HBV transcription and replication. It has been reported that HBx not only enhances HBV DNA replication but also activates the transcription of 3.5 kb HBV RNA. The augmentation of HBV transcrip-

tion is always observed in parallel to HBV replication, strongly suggesting that the stimulation of HBV replication is mainly due to the enhanced transcription by HBx

[49, 50]. It has also been suggested that HBx enhances HBV replication through

posttranscriptional regulation mechanisms, such as the regulation of intracellular calcium signaling and activation of downstream Pyk2/FAK kinase [51]. Recent

studies have found that HBx can promote the degradation of SMC5/6 to enhance

HBV replication [52, 53].

3.3 Immunopathogenesis of HBV

The immunopathogenesis of CHB is complex and has not yet been fully eluci-

dated. Numerous studies have shown that HBV is a non-cytopathic hepatotropic

virus. Persistent liver inflammation plays an important role in the progression of CHB to cirrhosis and HCC. The innate immune response plays a role in the early

stages of HBV infection and induces subsequent adaptive immune responses

[54]. HBV inhibits the innate immune response by interfering with Toll-like receptors and retinoic acid receptors through the viral components such as

HBeAg and HBx [55–59]. Although the innate immune response of CHB patients is impaired, antiviral cytokines of the innate immune pathway can still inhibit

HBV. This is supported by the ability of IFNα or TLR agonists to induce innate

immunity to inhibit HBV replication [60]. At present, many novel anti-HBV

drugs are being developed to inhibit HBV replication through the upregulation of

innate immunity.

Many CHB patients are characterized with impaired frequency and function of

myeloid dendritic cells (mDC) and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) in their

peripheral blood. Immature mDC and pDC with decreased capacity to produce

IFN-α are associated with tolerogenic T-cell responses and HBV persistence [61].

HBV-specific immune response plays a major role in HBV clearance. The virus-

specific effector CD8+ T-cell response is central to HBV pathogenesis. Major histo-compatibility complex (MHC) class I-restricted CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes can

induce hepatocyte apoptosis and secrete IFN-γ, thus inhibiting HBV replication

through non-cytolytic mechanisms. In chronic HBV infection, apoptosis-prone

HBV-specific CD8+ T cells, the reduced cytokine function and proliferative capac-

ity, and the T-cell exhaustion contribute to HBV persistence [60].


4 Current Antiviral Drugs Against HBV and New Antiviral

Drugs Under Development

4.1 Current Antiviral Drugs Against HBV

Current antiviral drugs for HBV include IFNs and NAs. The first milestone in CHB

treatment is the utilization of IFN-α (IFN-α-2a, IFN-α-2b, and IFN-α-1b) produced by recombinant DNA technology. Meta-analysis has shown that conventional IFN-treated HBeAg-positive CHB patients have higher HBeAg seroconversion and

HBsAg clearance, but lower cirrhosis and HCC incidence than the patients without

IFN treatment [62, 63]. However, due to its limited efficacy, low sustained viral response, and frequent injections, the conventional IFN has been largely replaced with the long-acting Peg-IFN, which was approved by the US FDA for HBV treatment in 2002. International multicenter randomized controlled clinical trials showed that HBeAg-positive CHB patients treated with Peg-IFN-α-2a for 48 weeks resulted

in HBeAg seroconversion rate of 32% at 24 weeks posttreatment follow-up [64] and

the HBeAg seroconversion reached 41% at 48 weeks posttreatment follow-up [65].

Similar HBV DNA inhibition and HBeAg seroconversion can also be achieved in

HBeAg-positive CHB patients treated with Peg-IFN-α-2b [66].

The second milestone in CHB treatment is the use of the lamivudine (LAM),

which revolutionized the treatment of CHB. LAM exhibits good antiviral effects in HBeAg-positive and HBeAg-negative CHB patients, even in CHB patients with

advanced liver diseases. However, resistance to LAM can be easily developed. It has been reported that LAM resistance can reach up to 80% after 5 years of treatment

[67]. Following LAM, adefovir dipivoxil (ADV) was the second antiviral drug approved for anti-HBV therapy. However, like LAM, ADV has low genetic barrier

and drug resistance can be easily developed and another drawback for ADV is its

nephrotoxicity [18]. Telbivudine (LdT) is another nucleoside analog for antiviral treatment of CHB. With a proven safety profile, LdT is a pregnancy category B

medication and has been applied to prevent mother-to-child-transmission (MTCT)

in mothers with HBV infection [68–70]. However, similar with LAM and ADV, long-term LdT treatment leads to high rate of drug resistance (34% after 3-year

TBV therapy) [71].

The third milestone in CHB treatment is the clinical use of the potent and low-

resistant NAs: ETV and TDF. Both ETV and TDF can strongly inhibit HBV replica-

tion and have high genetic barrier to drug resistance. It has been shown that the 3-year cumulative ETV resistance rate is 1.7–3.3% [72]. Resistance to TDF was not detected in CHB patients after 6 years of TDF monotherapy [73]. Most CHB

patients with long-term use of ETV or TDF can achieve histological improvement

and even the reversal of liver fibrosis. Tenofovir alafenamide (TAF) has been

recently approved for treatment of CHB in adults. Compared to TDF, TAF has a

better safety profile (lower rates of bone and renal abnormalities) and similar

antiviral efficacy. Therefore, current international guidelines recommend the use of Peg- IFN, ETV, TDF, and TAF as first-line therapeutic options for CHB, while the

NAs with low genetic barriers (LAM, ADV, and LdT) are no longer recommended

as the first-line antiviral agents in treatment-naïve CHB patients.

4.2 Optimization Treatment Strategies Based on Current

Antiviral Drugs

Currently, most CHB patients treated with NAs or Peg-IFN monotherapy can

achieve sustained viral suppression, whereas the difficulty in achieving HBsAg loss or the elimination of cccDNA remains the major obstacle for the cure of

CHB. Theoretically, the combination of NAs and Peg-IFN may have a synergistic

therapeutic effect to enable more CHB patients achieving HBsAg loss. Many clini-

cal studies have been conducted to investigate the efficacies of different optimization strategies of NAs and Peg-IFN combination [64, 74–83].

One of the combination strategies is the simultaneous administration of NAs and

Peg-IFN (the de novo combination). However, the initial de novo combination of

LAM plus Peg-IFN and ADV plus Peg-IFN showed less-than-desirable results in

treatment-naïve patients [64, 74, 75]. Recently, the de novo combination of TDF

and Peg-IFN in treatment-naive CHB patients for 48 weeks led to increased rate of HBsAg loss at week 72 (9.1%) than those receiving Peg-IFN (2.8%) or TDF (0%)

alone [78]. However, a recent randomized controlled, open-label study did not support the advantage of de novo combination of NA and Peg-IFN in CHB patients [77].

The other strategy to combine NA and Peg-IFN is the sequential combination,

which means the “add-on” or “switch-to” strategy to CHB patients who are already

on NA treatment. The “early add-on” strategy was investigated in the ARES study by comparing 24 weeks of ETV followed by 24 weeks of Peg-IFN add-on versus

48 weeks of ETV monotherapy for treatment-naïve HBeAg-positive CHB patients

[79, 80]. The results showed no favorable effect of the combination strategy. The

“late add-on” strategy was investigated in the PEGAN study enrolling only HBeAg-

negative CHB patients with undetected HBV DNA by at least 1 year of NA treatment

[81]. In the PEGAN study, patients were randomized to either continue NA or add on Peg-IFN treatment for 48 weeks. The results showed that HBsAg loss rates were

significantly higher in the full-dose Peg-IFN add-on group than in the NA group [81].

The “early switch-to” strategy was investigated in the OSST study enrolling

HBeAg-positive patients who had received 9 to 36 months of ETV therapy with

HBeAg <100 PEIU/ml and HBV DNA ≤ 1000 copies/ml [82]. The enrolled patients in the OSST study were randomized to receive ETV or switch to Peg-IFN-α2a for

48 weeks. The “late switch-to” strategy was investigated in the New Switch study

enrolling HBeAg-positive patients who achieved HBeAg loss and HBV

DNA < 200 IU/mL with previous NA treatment (ADV, LAM or ETV). The patients

were randomized to receive Peg-IFN for 48 or 96 weeks [83]. Both the OSST study

and the New Switch study demonstrated a significant increase of HBsAg loss in the Peg-IFN switch group than the NA monotherapy group, and CHB patients with low

baseline HBsAg level and on-treatment HBsAg response are more likely to benefit

from the “switch-to” combination therapy [82, 83].

4.3 Advances in the Development of New Anti-HBV Drugs

The development of new anti-HBV drugs can be summarized into two categories:

[1] new direct-acting antiviral drugs targeting the different steps of HBV life cycle,

and [2] new indirect antiviral drugs modulating host immune response to inhibit or potentially eradicate HBV. The direct-acting antiviral drugs under development

include HBV entry inhibitors, the therapeutic approaches targeting HBV cccDNA,

RNA interference (RNAi)-based agents, capsid assembly inhibitors/modulators,

new NAs targeting HBV polymerase, ribonuclease H (RNaseH) inhibitors, and

HBsAg release inhibitors. The indirect antiviral drugs to suppress HBV via modu-

lating the host innate or adaptive immunity include TLR-7 and TLR-8 agonists, retinoic acid-inducible gene 1 (RIG-1)/nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain

protein 2 (NOD-2) agonists, programmed death receptor 1 (PD-1) inhibitors, and

different kinds of therapeutic vaccines.

4.3.1 Direct Antiviral Drugs Against the Life Cycle of HBV

HBV entry inhibitor Myrcludex-B targeting the NTCP receptor is currently under

phase II clinical trial. It has been shown that Myrcludex-B not only inhibits HBV

DNA replication but also reduces cccDNA formation [84, 85]. Genome-editing

technologies including transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs),

and the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/Cas9 (CRISPR/

Cas9) system, which can be designed to target HBV cccDNA sequences, represent

highly promising therapeutic tools to achieve the ultimate goal of curing CHB [86–

91]. However, specific and efficient delivery of the gene editing sequences to HBV-infected hepatocytes and the risk of the intrinsic off-target effects of the

genome-editing technologies are big challenges that need to be met in the future.

The next-generation RNAi agents that target HBV transcripts to reduce viral anti-

gen, HBV DNA, and cccDNA levels are also being developed. For example, the

RNAi-based agent ARC-520 is currently in phase II clinical trial [92]. The nucleo-

capsid assembly inhibitors including NVR 3–778 [93–95], JNJ-6379 [96], GLS4

[97], and ABI-H0731 [98] are currently under different phases of clinical trials.

Several new NAs currently under different phases of clinical trials include Besifovir (LB80380/BSV, a new acyclic nucleotide analog) [90, 99–101] and CMX157 (phase

II) [102, 103]. The RNaseH inhibitors are also promising candidates for developing new anti-HBV drugs [104, 105]. The HBsAg release inhibitors include REP2139 or its analog REP2165 which have progressed to phase II clinical trials. The results

showed that the combination of REP2139-Mg or REP2165-Mg (250 mg iv qW)

with TDF and Peg-IFN led to HBsAg loss or seroconversion in a high proportion of

CHB patients (http://replicor.com/, as of August 2019).

4.3.2 Indirect Antiviral Drugs that Modulate Host Immune Response

to Control CHB

Indirect antiviral drugs that exhibit anti-HBV effect may function through modulating the host innate or adaptive immune response. The rationale behind the development of indirect antiviral drugs to modulate the host innate immunity is that the HBV-infected hepatocytes have impaired innate immune response; thus reactivating

the host innate immune response may lead to the control of HBV infection. For

example, Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR-7) and TLR-8 agonists are currently under clinical trials [106, 107]. In chronic HBV infection, T-cell immune tolerance and the T-cell exhaustion contribute to HBV persistence. Sustained high expression of the programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) in T cells plays an important role in T-cell exhaustion; thus, blocking the PD-1 pathway using the anti-PD-1 antibody (nivolumab)

could be a major immunotherapeutic strategy to treat HBV infection [108, 109]. In addition, the therapeutic vaccines to treat HBV infection are also being developed

[110–114].

In summary, since the discovery of HBV by Blumberg and Alter in the 1960s,

tremendous advances in the field of HBV basic research, prevention, and clinical

control of HBV infection have been achieved. A deeper understanding of the HBV

life cycle and HBV immunopathogenesis, together with the development of cell

culture models and animal models for HBV study, will further drive the develop-

ment and testing of new therapeutic agents against HBV infection. Future treatment options for HBV cure may be a combination of multiple antiviral drugs, either the combination of different direct antiviral drugs targeting the various steps of HBV

life cycle or the combination of direct antiviral drugs with host immune modulators.

With the optimization treatment strategies based on current antiviral drugs and the newly developed antiviral agents, the ultimate cure of HBV infection will be

achieved in the foreseeable future.

Acknowledgments This work was supported by a grant from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.81772193).