


Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 

www.cdc.gov/mmwr 

Recommendations and Reports 

September 19, 2008 / Vol. 57 / No. RR-8 







INSIDE: Continuing Education Examination 

depar

depar

depar

depar

department of health and human ser

tment of health and human ser

tment of health and human ser

tment of health and human ser

tment of health and human services

vices

vices

vices



Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention




 

 

 

 

 

MMWR

The MMWR series of publications is published by the Coordinating 

Center for Health Information and Service, Centers for Disease 

Control and Prevention (CDC), U.S. Department of Health and 

Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30333. 

Suggested Citation: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 

[Title]. MMWR 2008;57(No. RR-#):[inclusive page numbers]. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 

Julie L. Gerberding, MD, MPH 

Director 

Tanja Popovic, MD, PhD 

Chief Science Officer 

James W. Stephens, PhD 

Associate Director for Science 

Steven L. Solomon, MD 

Director, Coordinating Center for Health Information and Service 

Jay M. Bernhardt, PhD, MPH 

Director, National Center for Health Marketing 

Katherine L. Daniel, PhD 

Deputy Director, National Center for Health Marketing 

Editorial and Production Staff 

Frederic E. Shaw, MD, JD 

Editor, MMWR Series 

Susan F. Davis, MD 

(Acting) Assistant Editor, MMWR Series 

Teresa F. Rutledge 

Managing Editor, MMWR Series 

David C. Johnson 

(Acting) Lead Technical Writer-Editor 

Jeffrey D. Sokolow, MA 

Project Editor 



(Acting)





Visual Information Specialists 







Information Technology Specialists 

Editorial Board 





























































Disclosure of Relationship 

CDC, our planners, and our content experts wish to disclose they 

have no financial interests or other relationships with the 

manufacturers of commercial products, suppliers, or commercial 

services, or commercial supporters. Presentations will not include 

any discussion of the unlabeled use of a product or a product under 

investigational use. 


 

 

1 

Vol. 57 / RR-8	 

Recommendations and Reports 











National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Division of Viral Hepatitis 

Summary 

Serologic testing for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) is the primary way to identify persons with chronic hepatitis B virus 

(HBV) infection. Testing has been recommended previously for pregnant women, infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers, house­

hold contacts and sex partners of HBV-infected persons, persons born in countries with HBsAg prevalence of &gt;8%, persons who 

are the source of blood or body fluid exposures that might warrant postexposure prophylaxis (e.g., needlestick injury to a health-

care worker or sexual assault), and persons infected with human immunodeficiency virus. This report updates and expands 

previous CDC guidelines for HBsAg testing and includes new recommendations for public health evaluation and management 

for chronically infected persons and their contacts. Routine testing for HBsAg now is recommended for additional populations 

with HBsAg prevalence of &gt;2%: persons born in geographic regions with HBsAg prevalence of &gt;2%, men who have sex with men, 

and injection-drug users. Implementation of these recommendations will require expertise and resources to integrate HBsAg 

screening in prevention and care settings serving populations recommended for HBsAg testing. This report is intended to serve as 

a resource for public health officials, organizations, and health-care professionals involved in the development, delivery, and 

evaluation of prevention and clinical services. 

Introduction	 

United States. Persons with chronic HBV infection can 

remain asymptomatic for years, unaware of their infections 

Chronic infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a com­

and of their risks for transmitting the virus to others and for 

mon cause of death associated with liver failure, cirrhosis, and 

having serious liver disease later in life. Early identification of

liver cancer. Worldwide, approximately 350 million persons 

persons with chronic HBV infection permits the identifica­

have chronic HBV infection, and an estimated 620,000 per­

tion and vaccination of susceptible household contacts and

sons die annually from HBV-related liver disease (1,2). Hepa­

sex partners, thereby interrupting ongoing transmission. 

titis B vaccination is highly effective in preventing infection 

All persons with chronic HBV infection need medical man-

with HBV and consequent acute and chronic liver disease. In 

agement to monitor the onset and progression of liver disease 

the United States, the number of newly acquired HBV infec­

and liver cancer. Safe and effective antiviral agents now are 

tions has declined substantially as the result of the implemen­

available to treat chronic hepatitis B, providing a greater 

tation of a comprehensive national immunization program 

imperative to identify persons who might benefit from medi­

(3–5). However, the prevalence of chronic HBV infection 

cal evaluation, management, and antiviral therapy and other

remains high; in 2006, approximately 800,000–1.4 million 

treatment when indicated. The majority of the medications 

U.S. residents were living with chronic HBV infection 

now in use for hepatitis B treatment were approved by the 

(Table 1), and hepatitis B is the underlying cause of an esti-

Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2002 or later; two 

mated 2,000–4,000 deaths each year in the United States (6). 

forms of alfa 2 interferon and five oral nucleoside/nucleotide 

Improving the identification and public health management 

analogues have been approved, and other medications are in 

of persons with chronic HBV infection can help prevent seri­

clinical trials.

ous sequelae of chronic liver disease and complement immu-

Serologic testing for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) is 

nization strategies to eliminate HBV transmission in the 

the primary way to identify persons with chronic HBV infec­

tion. Because of the availability of effective vaccine and 

The material in this report originated in the National Center for HIV/ 

postexposure prophylaxis, CDC previously recommended 

AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Kevin Fenton, MD, 

HBsAg testing for pregnant women, infants born to HBsAg-

Director, and the Division of Viral Hepatitis, John Ward, MD, Director. 

positive mothers, household contacts and sex partners of HBV-

Corresponding preparer: 



infected persons, persons born in countries with HBsAg 

and TB Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road, MS G-37, Atlanta GA 30333. 

prevalence of &gt;8%, and persons who are the source of blood 

Telephone: 404-718-8596; Fax: 404-718-8595; email: chw4@cdc.gov. 

or body fluid exposures that might warrant postexposure pro­


 

2 

MMWR 

September 19, 2008 

TABLE 1. Estimated number and percentage of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)–positive persons, by population segment — 

United States, 2006 

2006

 HBsAg–positive persons 

population 

HBsAg prevalence 

No. 

Population segment 

(millions) 

(%) 

(thousands) 

(%) 

U.S.-born, noninstitutionalized* 

254.3 

0.1 

356 

(30–50) 

(95% CI† = 0.1–0.2) 

(229–534) 

Foreign-born§ 

37.5 

1.0–2.6 

375–975 

(47–70) 

Correctional institutions¶ 

2.2 

2.0 

44 

(3–5) 

Other group living quarters** 

6 

0.5 

30 

(2–3) 

Total 

300 

0.3–0.5 

805–1,405 

* Source: 2006 American Community Survey, U.S. Census Bureau. Excludes persons living in correctional institutions and other group quarters. HBsAg 

prevalence estimates were derived from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (CDC, unpublished data, 2008). 

† Confidence interval. 

§ Sources: 2006 American Community Survey, U.S. Census Bureau. Prevalence range represents estimates from the National Health and Nutrition 

Examination Survey (1%) (CDC, unpublished data, 2008) and country-specific HBsAg estimates reported in the medical literature (2.6%) (CDC, unpub­

lished data, 2008), applied to the estimated population by country of origin. Infant immunization programs in many countries have led to marked 

decreases in incidence and prevalence among younger, vaccinated members of these populations, which are largely not reflected in the medical 

literature (Wasley A, Kruszon-Moran D, Kuhnert W, et al. Hepatitis B prevalence in the U.S. in era of vaccination [Abstract 723]. 45th Annual Meeting of 

the Infectious Diseases Society of America, San Diego, California; October 4–7, 2007). 

¶ Sources: Sabol WJ, Minton TD, Harrison PM. Prison and jail inmates at midyear 2006. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice 

Statistics, Office of Justice Programs; 2007. Available at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/pjim06.pdf. CDC. Prevention and control of infections 

with hepatitis viruses in correctional settings. MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-1). 

** Includes college dormitories, military quarters, nursing homes, group homes, and long-term care hospitals, as well as homeless persons. For persons 

in other group-living quarters, estimated HBsAg prevalence was assumed to be equal to the mean prevalence in other groups. Source: 2006 American 

Community Survey, U.S. Census Bureau. 

phylaxis (e.g., needlestick injury to a health-care worker or 

HBV endemicity, and 3) the increasing benefits of care and 

sexual assault), and persons infected with human immunode-

opportunities for prevention for infected persons and their 

ficiency virus (HIV) (4,5,7–11). This report updates and 

contacts. On the basis of this discussion, CDC determined 

expands these multiple previous CDC guidelines for HBsAg 

that reconsideration of current guidelines was warranted. This 

testing and includes new recommendations for public health 

report summarizes current HBsAg testing recommendations 

evaluation and management of chronically infected persons 

published previously by CDC, expands CDC recommenda­

and their contacts. Routine HBsAg testing now is recom-

tions to increase the identification of chronically infected 

mended for persons born in geographic regions in which 

persons in the United States, and defines the components 

HBsAg prevalence is &gt;2%, men who have sex with men 

of programs needed to identify HBV-infected persons 

(MSM), and injection-drug users (IDUs). 

successfully. 

Methods 

Clinical Features and Natural 

During February 7–8, 2007, CDC convened a meeting of 

History of HBV Infection 

researchers, physicians, state and local public health profes-

HBV is a 42-nm DNA virus in the Hepadnaviridae family. 

sionals, and other persons in the public and private sectors 

After a susceptible person is exposed, the virus is transported 

with expertise in the prevention, care, and treatment of chronic 

by the bloodstream to the liver, which is the primary site of 

hepatitis B. These consultants reviewed available published 

HBV replication. HBV infection can produce either asymp­

and unpublished epidemiologic and treatment data, consid­

tomatic or symptomatic infection. When clinical manifesta­

ered whether to recommend testing specific new populations 

tions of acute disease occur, illness typically begins 2–3 months 

for HBV infection, and discussed how best to implement new 

after HBV exposure (range: 6 weeks–6 months). Infants, chil­

and existing testing strategies. Topics discussed included 

dren aged &lt;5 years, and immunosuppressed adults with newly 

1) the changing epidemiology of chronic HBV infection, 

acquired HBV infection typically are asymptomatic; 30%– 

2) health disparities caused by the disproportionate HBV­

50% of other persons aged &gt;5 years have clinical signs or symp­

related morbidity and mortality among persons infected as 

toms of acute disease after infection. Symptoms of acute 

infants and young children in countries with high levels of 

hepatitis B include fatigue, poor appetite, nausea, vomiting, 


3 

Vol. 57 / RR-8 

Recommendations and Reports 

abdominal pain, low-grade fever, jaundice, dark urine, and 

light stool color. Clinical signs include jaundice, liver tender­

ness, and possibly hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. Fatigue and 

loss of appetite typically precede jaundice by 1–2 weeks. Acute 

illness typically lasts 2–4 months. The case-fatality rate among 

persons with reported cases of acute hepatitis B is approxi­

mately 1%, with the highest rates occurring in adults aged 

&gt;60 years (12). 

Primary HBV infection can be self-limited, with elimina­

tion of virus from blood and subsequent lasting immunity 

against reinfection, or it can progress to chronic infection with 

continuing viral replication in the liver and persistent vire­

mia. Resolved primary infection is not a risk factor for subse­

quent occurrence of chronic liver disease or hepatocellular 

carcinoma (HCC). However, patients with resolved infection 

who become immunosuppressed (e.g., from chemotherapy or 

medication) might, albeit rarely, experience reactivation of 

hepatitis B with symptoms of acute illness (13–15). HBV DNA 

has been detected in the livers of persons without serologic 

markers of chronic infection after resolution of acute infec­

tion (13,16–19). The risk for progression to chronic infec­

tion is related inversely to age at the time of infection. HBV 

infection becomes chronic in &gt;90% of infants, approximately 

25%–50% of children aged 1–5 years, and &lt;5% of older chil­

dren and adults) (13,20–23). Immunosuppressed persons (e.g., 

hemodialysis patients and persons with HIV infection) are at 

increased risk for chronic infection (22). Once chronic HBV 

infection is established, 0.5% of infected persons spontane­

ously resolve infection annually (indicated by the loss of 

detectable HBsAg and serum HBV DNA and normalization 

of serum alanine aminotransferase [ALT] levels); resolution is 

rarer among children than among adults (13,24,25). 

Persons with chronic HBV infection can be asymptomatic 

and have no evidence of liver disease, or they can have a spec­

trum of disease, ranging from chronic hepatitis to cirrhosis or 

liver cancer. Chronic infection is responsible for the majority 

of cases of HBV-related morbidity and mortality; follow-up 

studies have demonstrated that approximately 25% of per­

sons infected with HBV as infants or young children and 15% 

of those infected at older ages died of cirrhosis or liver cancer. 

The majority remained asymptomatic until onset of cirrhosis 

or end-stage liver disease (26). Persons with histologic evi­

dence of chronic hepatitis B (e.g., hepatic inflammation and 

fibrosis) are at higher risk for HCC than HBV-infected per­

sons without such evidence (27). Potential extrahepatic com­

plications of chronic HBV infection include polyarteritis 

nodosa (28,29), membranous glomerulonephritis, and mem­

branoproliferative glomerulonephritis (30). 

Serologic Markers of HBV Infection 

The serologic patterns of chronic HBV infection are varied 

and complex. Antigens and antibodies associated with HBV 

infection include HBsAg and antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs), 

hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg) and antibody to HBcAg 

(anti-HBc), and hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) and antibody 

to HBeAg (anti-HBe). Testing also can be performed to assess 

the presence and concentration of circulating HBV DNA. At 

least one serologic marker is present during each of the differ­

ent phases of HBV infection (Figures 1 and 2) (31). Serologic 

assays are available commercially for all markers except HBcAg, 

because no free HBcAg circulates in blood. No rapid or oral 

fluid tests are licensed in the United States to test for any 

HBV markers. 

Three phases of chronic HBV infection have been recog­

nized: the immune tolerant phase (HBeAg-positive, with high 

levels of HBV DNA but absence of liver disease), the immune 

active or chronic hepatitis phase (HBeAg-positive, HBeAg­

negative, or anti-HBe-positive, with high levels of HBV DNA 

and active liver inflammation), and the inactive phase (anti-

HBe positive, normal liver aminotransferase levels, and low 

or absent levels of HBV DNA) (32). Patients can evolve 

through these phases or revert from inactive hepatitis B back 

to immune active infection at any time. 

The serologic markers typically used to differentiate among 

acute, resolving, and chronic infection are HBsAg, IgM anti-

HBc, and anti-HBs (Table 2). The presence of HBeAg and 

HBV DNA generally indicates high levels of viral replication; 

FIGURE 1. Typical serologic course of acute hepatitis B virus 

infection with recovery 

Symptoms 

*

HBeAg 

anti-HBe 

Total anti-HBc 

HBsAg 

IgM** anti-HBc 

anti-HBs 

¶ 

§ 

0 

4 

8

12 

16 

20 

24 

28 

32 

36 

52 

Postexposure (wks) 

100 

* Hepatitis B e antigen. 

† 

§ 

¶ 

** Immunoglobulin M. 

†† Antibody to HBsAg. 


4 

MMWR 

September 19, 2008 

FIGURE 2. Typical serologic course of acute hepatitis B virus 

(HBV) infection with progression to chronic HBV infection 

Acute (6 mos) 

Chronic (yrs) 

Total anti-HBc 

HBsAg 

IgM** anti-HBc 

HBeAg 

anti-HBe 

¶ 

§ 

* 

0 

4 

8

 12

 16

 20

 24

 28

 32

 36

 

Postexposure (wks) 

52

 

Yrs 

* Hepatitis B e antigen. 

† Antibody to HBeAg. 

§ Antibody to hepatitis B core antigen. 

¶ Hepatitis B surface antigen. 

** Immunoglobulin M. 

the presence of anti-HBe usually indicates decreased or unde­

tectable HBV DNA and lower levels of viral replication. 

In newly infected persons, HBsAg is the only serologic 

marker detected during the first 3–5 weeks after infection. 

The average time from exposure to detection of HBsAg is 30 

days (range: 6–60 days) (31,33). Highly sensitive single-sample 

nucleic acid tests can detect HBV DNA in the serum of an 

infected person 10–20 days before detection of HBsAg (34). 

Transient HBsAg positivity has been reported for up to 18 

days after hepatitis B vaccination and is clinically insignifi­

cant (35,36). 

Anti-HBc appears at the onset of symptoms or liver-test 

abnormalities in acute HBV infection and persists for life in 

the majority of persons. Acute or recently acquired infection 

can be distinguished from chronic infection by the presence 

of the immunoglobulin M (IgM) class of anti-HBc, which is 

detected at the onset of acute hepatitis B and persists for up to 

6 months if the infection resolves. In patients with chronic 

HBV infection, IgM anti-HBc can persist during viral repli­

cation at low levels that typically are not detectable by the 

assays used in the United States. However, persons with exac­

erbations of chronic infection can test positive for IgM anti-

HBc (37). Because the positive predictive value of this test is 

low in asymptomatic persons, IgM anti-HBc testing for diag­

nosis of acute hepatitis B should be limited to persons with 

clinical evidence of acute hepatitis or an epidemiologic link to 

a person with HBV infection. 

In persons who recover from HBV infection, HBsAg and 

HBV DNA usually are eliminated from the blood, and anti-

HBs appears. In persons who become chronically infected, 

HBsAg and HBV DNA persist. In persons in whom chronic 

infection resolves, HBsAg becomes undetectable; anti-HBc 

persists and anti-HBs will occur in the majority of these per­

sons (38,39). 

In certain persons, total anti-HBc is the only detectable HBV 

serologic marker. Isolated anti-HBc positivity can represent 

1) resolved HBV infection in persons who have recovered but 

whose anti-HBs levels have waned, most commonly in high-

prevalence populations; 2) chronic infection in which circu­

lating HBsAg is not detectable by commercial serology, most 

commonly in high-prevalence populations and among per­

sons with HIV or HCV infection (40) (HBV DNA has been 

isolated from the blood in &lt;5% of persons with isolated anti-

HBc) (40,41); or 3) false-positive reaction. In low-prevalence 

populations, isolated anti-HBc may be found in 10%–20% 

of persons with serologic markers of HBV infection, most of 

whom will demonstrate a primary response after hepatitis B 

vaccination(42,43). Persons positive only for anti-HBc are 

unlikely to be infectious except under unusual circumstances 

in which they are the source for direct percutaneous exposure 

of susceptible recipients to substantial quantities of virus (e.g., 

blood transfusion or organ transplant) (44). 

HBeAg can be detected in the serum of persons with acute 

or chronic HBV infection. In the majority of those with 

TABLE 2. Typical interpretation of serologic test results for hepatitis B virus infection

 Serologic marker 

HBsAg* 

Total anti-HBc† 

IgM§ anti-HBc 

Anti-HBs¶ 

Interpretation 

—** 

— 

— 

— 

Never infected and no evidence of immunization 

+†† 

+ 

— 

— 

Chronic infection 

+ 

+ 

+ 

— 

Acute infection 

— 

+ 

— 

+ 

Recovered from past infection and immune 

— 

— 

— 

+ 

Immune (immunization or natural) 

* Hepatitis B surface antigen. 

† 

§ 

¶ 

** Negative test result. 

†† Positive test result. To ensure that an HBsAg-positive test result is not a false positive, samples with repeatedly reactive HBsAg results should be tested 

with a licensed neutralizing confirmatory test. 


 

 

5 

Vol. 57 / RR-8 

Recommendations and Reports 

chronic infection, HBeAg is cleared over time, and anti-HBe 

appears (45–49). Presence of HBeAg correlates with more 

active disease: patients with HBeAg typically have high levels 

of HBV DNA (106–1010 IU/mL), whereas those who are 

HBeAg-negative and anti-HBe-positive generally have low or 

only modest HBV DNA levels (0–105 IU/mL). 

Epidemiology of HBV Infection 

in the United States 

Transmission 

HBV is transmitted by percutaneous and mucosal exposure 

to infectious blood or body fluids. The highest concentra­

tions of virus are found in blood; however, semen and saliva 

also have been demonstrated to be infectious (50). HBV 

remains viable and infectious in the environment for at least 7 

days and can be present in high concentrations on inanimate 

objects, even in the absence of visible blood (13,51). Persons 

with chronic HBV infection are the major source of new 

infections, and the primary routes of HBV transmission are 

sexual contact, percutaneous exposure to infectious body flu­

ids (such as occurs through needle sharing by IDUs or 

needlestick injuries in health-care settings), perinatal expo­

sure to an infected mother, and prolonged, close personal con­

tact with an infected person (e.g., via contact with exudates 

from dermatologic lesions, contact with contaminated sur­

faces, or sharing toothbrushes or razors), as occurs in house­

hold contact (5,52). No evidence exists of transmission of HBV 

by casual contact in the workplace, and transmission occurs 

rarely in childcare settings (4). Few cases have been reported 

in which health-care workers have transmitted infection to 

patients, particularly since implementation of standard 

universal infection control precautions (53). 

Incidence of HBV Infection 

During 1985–2006, incidence of acute hepatitis B in the 

United States declined substantially, from 11.5 cases per 

100,000 population in 1985 to 1.6 in 2006 (12). The actual 

incidence of new HBV infections is estimated to be approxi­

mately tenfold higher than the reported incidence of acute 

hepatitis B, after adjustment for underreporting of cases and 

asymptomatic infections. In 2006, an estimated 46,000 per­

sons were newly infected with HBV (54). The greatest 

declines in incidence of acute disease have occurred in the 

cohorts of children for whom infant and adolescent catch-up 

vaccination was recommended (12). Among children aged &lt;15 

years, incidence of hepatitis B declined 98% during 1990– 

2006, from 1.2 per 100,000 population in 1990 to 0.02 in 

2006 (12). This decline reflects the effective implementation 

of hepatitis B vaccination in the United States. Since 2001, 

fewer than 30 cases of acute hepatitis B have been reported 

annually in children born in 1991 or later, the majority of 

whom were international adoptees or children born outside 

the United States who were not fully vaccinated (55). In 2006, 

adults aged &gt;20 years had the highest incidence of acute HBV 

infection, reflecting low hepatitis B vaccination coverage 

among adults with behavioral risks for HBV infection (e.g., 

MSM, IDUs, persons with multiple sex partners, and persons 

whose sex partners are infected with HBV) (12). 

Prevalence of HBV Infection 

and Its Sequelae 

U.S. mortality data for 2000–2003 indicated that HBV 

infection was the underlying cause of an estimated 2,000– 

4,000 deaths annually. The majority of these deaths resulted 

from cirrhosis and liver cancer (6; CDC, unpublished data, 

2000–2003). 

The burden of chronic HBV infection in the United States 

is greater among certain populations as a result of earlier age 

at infection, immune suppression, or higher levels of circulat­

ing infection. These include persons born in geographic 

regions with high (&gt;8%) or intermediate (2%–7%) prevalence 

of chronic HBV infection, HIV-positive persons (who might 

have additional risk factors) (56–58), and certain adult popu­

lations for whom hepatitis B vaccination has been recom­

mended because of behavioral risks (e.g., MSM and IDUs). 

An accurate estimate of the prevalence of chronic HBV infec­

tion in the United States must be derived from multiple sources 

of data to account for the disproportionate contributions of 

persons of foreign birth, members of certain ethnic minority 

populations, and persons with certain medical conditions 

(Table 1). For the U.S.-born civilian noninstitutionalized 

population, prevalence estimates can be obtained from the 

most recent National Health and Nutrition Examination Sur­

vey (NHANES), which was conducted during 1999–2004 

(available at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes.htm). Because 

data from studies of foreign-born U.S. residents indicate that 

HBsAg seroprevalence corresponds to HBV endemicity in the 

country of origin (5), for the foreign-born population resid­

ing in the United States, HBV prevalence estimates were 

derived by applying country-specific prevalence estimates gath­

ered from the scientific literature and the World Health 

Organization (2) to the number of foreign-born U.S. resi­

dents by their country of birth as reported by the 2006 U.S. 

Census American Community Survey (59). Other popula­

tions for which estimates were calculated included those in 

correctional institutions and the homeless. Together, these 


6 

MMWR 

September 19, 2008 

sources indicated that an estimated 800,000–1.4 million per­

sons in the United States have chronic HBV infection. 

Approximately 0.3%–0.5% of U.S. residents are chronically 

infected with HBV; 47%–70% of these persons were born in 

other countries (Table 1). 

Global Variation in Prevalence 

of HBV Infection 

HBV transmission patterns and the seroprevalence of 

chronic HBV infection vary markedly worldwide, although 

seroprevalence studies in many countries are limited, and the 

epidemiology of hepatitis B is changing. Approximately 45% 

of persons worldwide live in regions in which HBV is highly 

endemic (i.e., where prevalence of chronic HBV infection is 

&gt;8% among adults and that of resolved or chronic infection 

[i.e., anti-HBc positivity] is &gt;60%) (2) (Figure 3). Histori­

cally, &gt;90% of new infections occurred among infants and 

young children as the result of perinatal or household trans­

mission during early childhood (26). Infant immunization 

programs in many countries have led to marked decreases in 

incidence and prevalence among younger, vaccinated mem­

bers of these populations (60–63). Countries of intermediate 

HBV endemicity (i.e., HBsAg prevalence of 2%–7%) account 

for approximately 43% of the world’s population; in these 

countries, multiple modes of transmission (i.e., perinatal, 

household, sexual, injection-drug use, and health-care–related) 

contribute to the infection burden. Regions of the world with 

high or intermediate prevalence of HBsAg include much of 

Eastern Europe, Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and the Pacific 

Islands (2,4) (Figure 3 and Table 3). In countries of low ende­

micity (i.e., HBsAg prevalence of &lt;2%), the majority of new 

infections occur among adolescents and adults and are attrib­

utable to sexual and injection-drug–use exposures. However, 

in certain areas of low HBV endemicity, prevalence of chronic 

HBV infection is high among indigenous populations born 

before routine infant immunization (Table 3). 

FIGURE 3. Geographic distribution of chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection — worldwide, 2006* 

HBsAg prevalence 

&gt;8% = high 

2%–7% = intermediate 

&lt;2% = low  

* For multiple countries, estimates of prevalence of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), a marker of chronic HBV infection, are based on limited data 

and might not reflect current prevalence in countries that have implemented childhood hepatitis B vaccination. In addition, HBsAg prevalence might 

vary within countries by subpopulation and locality. 

Source: CDC. Travelers’ health; yellow book. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2008. Available at http://wwwn.cdc.gov/ 

travel/yellowbookch4-HepB.aspx. 


 

 

7 

Vol. 57 / RR-8 

Recommendations and Reports 

TABLE 3. Geographic regions* with hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) prevalence of &gt;2%† 

Region* 

HBsAg prevalence &gt;2% 

Africa 

All countries 

Asia§ 

All countries 

Australia and South Pacific 

All countries except Australia and New Zealand 

Middle East 

All countries except Cyprus and Israel 

Eastern Europe 

All countries except Hungary 

Western Europe 

Malta, Spain, and indigenous populations in Greenland 

North America 

Alaska Natives and indigenous populations in Northern Canada 

Mexico and Central America 

Guatemala and Honduras 

South America 

Ecuador, Guyana, Suriname, Venezuela, and Amazonian areas of Bolivia, Brazil, Columbia, and Peru 

Caribbean 

Antigua-Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts-Nevis, St. Lucia, and Turks and Caicos Islands 

* A complete list of countries in each region is available at http://wwwn.cdc.gov/travel/destinationList.htm. 

†Estimates of prevalence of HBsAg, a marker of chronic hepatitis B virus infection, are based on limited data and might not reflect current prevalence in 

countries that have implemented childhood hepatitis B vaccination. In addition, HBsAg prevalence might vary within countries by subpopulation and 

locality. 

§Asia includes three regions: Southeast Asia, East Asia, and Northern Asia. 

In the United States, marked decreases in the prevalence of 

chronic HBV infection among younger, vaccinated foreign-

born U.S. residents have been observed, most likely as a result 

of infant immunization programs globally (64). However, the 

rate of liver cancer deaths in the United States continues to be 

high among certain foreign-born U.S. populations. For 

example, the rate of liver cancer deaths is highest among Asians/ 

Pacific Islanders, reflecting the high prevalence of chronic 

hepatitis B in this population (65,66). Globally, other regions 

with HBsAg prevalence of &gt;2% also have identified high lev­

els of HBV-associated HCC (67,68). 

Household Contacts and Sex Partners 

of Persons With Chronic HBV Infection 

Serologic testing and hepatitis B vaccination has been rec­

ommended since 1982 (69) for household contacts and sex 

partners of persons with chronic HBV infection because pre­

vious studies have determined that 14%–60% of persons liv­

ing in households with persons with chronic HBV infection 

have serologic evidence indicating resolved HBV infection, 

and 3%–20% have evidence indicating chronic infection. The 

risk for infection is highest among unvaccinated children liv­

ing with a person with chronic HBV infection in a household 

or in an extended family setting and among sex partners of 

chronically infected persons (70–77). 

Men Who Have Sex With Men 

During 1994–2000, studies of MSM aged &lt;30 years iden­

tified chronic infection in 1.1% of MSM aged 18–24 years 

(95% confidence interval [CI] = 0–2.2%) (78), 2.1% (95% 

CI = 1.6%–2.6%) of MSM aged 15–21 years (79), and 2.3% 

(95% CI = 1.7%–2.8%) of MSM aged 22–29 years (80). In 

these studies, prevalence was higher (7.4%; 95% CI = 5.3%– 

9.6%) among young MSM who were HIV-positive than it 

was among those who were HIV-negative (1.5%; 95% CI = 

1.2%–1.9%) (CDC, unpublished data, 2007). Before the 

introduction of the hepatitis B vaccine in 1982, prevalence of 

chronic HBV infection among MSM was 4.6%–6.1% (81– 

83). In recent studies, prevalence of past infection increased 

with increasing age, suggesting that chronic infection might 

still be more prevalent among older MSM (79,80). 

Injection-Drug Users 

Chronic HBV infection has been identified in 2.7%–11.0% 

of IDUs in a variety of settings (84–91); HBsAg prevalence of 

7.1% (95% CI = 6.3%–7.8%) has been described among IDUs 

with HIV coinfection (92). IDUs contribute disproportion­

ately to the burden of infection in the United States: in chronic 

HBV infection registries, 4%–12% of reported chronically 

infected persons had a history of injection-drug use (93). Preva­

lence of resolved or chronic HBV infection among IDUs 

increases with the number of years of drug use and is associ­

ated with frequency of injection and with sharing of drug-

preparation equipment (e.g., cottons, cookers, and rinse water), 

independent of syringe sharing (94,95). 

HIV-Positive Persons 

As life expectancies for HIV-infected persons have increased 

with use of highly active antiretroviral therapy, liver disease, 

much of it related to HBV and HCV infections, has become 

the most common non-AIDS–related cause of death among 

this population (56,57,96,97). Chronic HBV infection has 

been identified in 6%–15% of HIV-positive persons from 

Western Europe and the United States, including 9%–17% 

of MSM; 7%–10% of IDUs; 4%–6% of heterosexuals; and 

1.5% of pregnant women (58,98,99). This high level of 

chronic infection reflects both common routes of transmis­

sion for HIV and HBV and a higher risk of chronicity after 

HBV infection in an immunocompromised host (100–102). 


8 

MMWR 

September 19, 2008 

Persons With Selected Medical Conditions 

Although population-level studies are lacking to determine 

HBsAg prevalence among populations with other medical 

conditions, persons with chronic HBV infection who initiate 

cytotoxic or immunosuppressive therapy (e.g., chemotherapy 

for malignant diseases, immunosuppression related to organ 

transplantation, and immunosuppression for rheumatologic 

and gastroenterologic disorders) are at risk for HBV reactiva­

tion and associated morbidity and mortality (32,101,102). 

Prophylactic antiviral therapy can prevent reactivation and 

possible fulminant hepatitis in HBsAg positive patients 

(13,101). 

Rationale for Testing to Identify 

Persons With Chronic HBV Infection 

Although limited data are available regarding the number of 

persons with chronic HBV infection in the United States who 

are unaware of their infection status, studies of programs con­

ducting HBsAg testing among Asian-born persons living in the 

United States indicated that approximately one third of infected 

persons were unaware of their HBV infection (5,103–105). 

Published studies for other populations are lacking. Prompt 

identification of chronic infection with HBV is essential to 

ensure that infected persons receive necessary care to prevent or 

delay onset of liver disease and services to prevent transmission 

to others. Treatment guidelines for chronic hepatitis B have been 

issued (13,106,107), and multiple medications have been 

approved for treatment of adults with chronic HBV infection. 

With recent advances in hepatitis B treatment and detection of 

liver cancer, identification of an HBV-infected person permits 

the implementation of important interventions to reduce mor­

bidity and mortality, including 

• clinical evaluations to detect onset and progression of 

HBV-related liver disease; 

• antiviral treatment for chronic HBV infection, which can 

delay or reverse the progression of liver disease (13); 

• baseline AFP measurement and periodic ultrasound sur­

veillance to detect HCC at a potentially treatable stage 

because early intervention to ablate small localized tumors, 

resect, or transplant has resulted in long-term tumor-free 

survival (108); and 

• interventions designed to reduce progression of liver injury, 

including vaccination against hepatitis A and counseling 

to avoid excessive alcohol use. Morbidity and mortality 

from hepatitis A are increased in the presence of chronic 

liver disease (109); alcohol use of &gt;25mL–30mL/day is 

associated with progression of HBV-related liver disease 

(110,111). 

Identification of infected persons also allows for primary 

prevention of ongoing HBV transmission by enabling per­

sons with chronic infection to adopt behaviors that reduce 

the risk of transmission to others and by permitting identifi­

cation of close contacts who require testing and subsequent 

vaccination (if identified as susceptible) or medical manage­

ment (if identified as having chronic HBV infection). Appro­

priate HBsAg testing and counseling also help prevent 

health-care–associated transmission in dialysis settings by 

allowing for cohorting of infected patients (112). Testing 

donated blood and donors of organs and tissues prevents 

infectious materials from being used and allows unvaccinated 

persons exposed to needlesticks to receive additional 

postexposure prophylaxis if the source of the exposure was 

HBV-infected (113). 

Testing for chronic HBV infection meets established public 

health screening criteria (114). Screening is a basic public 

health tool used to identify unrecognized health conditions 

so treatment can be offered before symptoms occur and, for 

communicable diseases, so interventions can be implemented 

to reduce the likelihood of continued transmission (114). 

Screening for chronic HBV infection is consistent with the 

main generally accepted public health screening criteria: 

1) chronic hepatitis B is a serious health disorder that can be 

diagnosed before symptoms occur; 2) it can be detected by 

reliable, inexpensive, and minimally invasive screening tests; 

3) chronically infected patients have years of life to gain if 

medical evaluation and/or treatment is initiated early, before 

symptoms occur; and 4) the costs of screening are reasonable 

in relation to the anticipated benefits (114). The cost-

effectiveness of identifying persons with chronic HBV infec­

tion cannot be calculated because treatment options constantly 

are increasing the number of years of disease-free life, and the 

various treatments have diverse associated costs. However, test­

ing for HBsAg in populations in which prevalence of chronic 

infection is 2% would cost $750–$3,752 for each chronically 

infected person identified (range represents $15.01 labora­

tory cost per test–$75 per screening visit [Marketscan® Data­

base, Ann Arbor, Michigan, unpublished data, 2007]); at 

higher prevalences, the per-case-identified cost would decrease. 

This is comparable to the cost of other screening programs. 

HIV testing in a population with 1% infection prevalence 

costs $2,133 ([$1,733–$3,733] per positive identified (115); 

[Marketscan® Database, Ann Arbor, Michigan, unpublished 

data, 2007] $16 per test [$13–$28]). Another study deter­

mined that the cost to identify each new case of diabetes mel­

litus using a two-step glucose-based screening process in three 

volunteer clinics in Minnesota was $4,064 per case identified 

(116). The cost of HBsAg testing in populations with &gt;2% 


 

 

 

 

9 

Vol. 57 / RR-8	 

Recommendations and Reports 

prevalence is substantially lower than the costs per case iden­

tified for certain fetal and newborn screening interventions 

(e.g., screening for newborn hearing disorders [$16,000 per 

case identified] [117], metabolic disorders [$68,000 per case] 

[118], neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia [NAIT] 

caused by anti-HPA-1a [$98,771 per case] [119], or fetal 

Down syndrome [$690,000 per case] [120]). 

To prevent HBV transmission, previous guidelines have rec­

ommended HBsAg testing for hemodialysis patients, preg­

nant women, and persons known or suspected of having been 

exposed to HBV (i.e., infants born to HBV-infected mothers, 

household contacts and sex partners of infected persons, and 

persons with known occupational or other exposures to infec­

tious blood or body fluids) (3,112). HBsAg testing also is 

required for donors of blood, organs, and tissues (113). To guide 

immunization efforts and identify infected persons, testing also 

has been recommended previously for persons born in regions 

with high HBV endemicity (4,121). Finally, testing has been 

recommended for HIV-positive persons on the basis of their 

high prevalence of HBV coinfection and their increased risk for 

HBV-associated morbidity and mortality (122). 

Because persons with chronic HBV infection serve as the 

reservoir for new HBV infections in the United States, identi­

fication of these persons will complement vaccination strate­

gies for elimination of HBV transmission. With the availability 

of effective treatments for chronic hepatitis B, the infected 

person, once identified, can benefit from testing as well. Thus, 

CDC recommends expanding HBV testing to include all per­

sons born in regions with HBsAg prevalence of &gt;2% (high 

and intermediate endemicity). CDC also recommends HBsAg 

testing in addition to vaccination for MSM and IDUs 

because of their higher-than-population prevalence and their 

ongoing risk for infection. Finally, to prevent adverse medical 

outcomes among persons who might be seeking medical care 

for other reasons, recommendations also are made to test per­

sons with ALT elevations of unknown etiology and candi­

dates for immunosuppressive therapies. 

Recommendations 

Persons who are most likely to be actively infected with HBV 

should be tested for chronic HBV infection. Testing should 

include a serologic assay for HBsAg offered as a part of rou­

tine care and be accompanied by appropriate counseling 

and referral for recommended clinical evaluation and care. 

Laboratories that provide HBsAg testing should use an FDA-

licensed or FDA-approved HBsAg test and should perform 

testing according to the manufacturer’s labeling, including test­

ing of initially reactive specimens with a licensed, neutralizing 

confirmatory test. A confirmed HBsAg-positive result indi­

cates active HBV infection, either acute or chronic; chronic 

infection is confirmed by the absence of IgM anti-HBc or by 

the persistence of HBsAg or HBV DNA for at least 6 months. 

All HBsAg-positive persons should be considered infectious. 

Recommendations and federal mandates related to routine 

testing for chronic HBV infection have been summarized 

(Table 4). To determine susceptibility among persons who are 

at ongoing risk for infection and recommended for vaccina­

tion, total anti-HBc or anti-HBs also should be tested at the 

time of serologic testing for chronic HBV infection. New 

populations recommended for testing are the following: 

•	 Persons born in geographic regions with HBsAg preva­

lence of &gt;2%. All persons born in geographic regions with 

HBsAg prevalence of &gt;2% (e.g., much of Eastern Europe, 

Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and the Pacific Islands) 

(Figure 3 and Table 3) and certain indigenous populations 

from countries with overall low HBV endemicity (&lt;2%) 

(Table 3) should be tested for chronic HBV infection. This 

includes immigrants, refugees, asylum seekers, and inter­

nationally adopted children born in these regions, regard­

less of vaccination status in their country of origin (123). 

Medical screening of applicants for lawful permanent resi­

dency in the United States represents an opportunity for 

education and voluntary HBsAg testing. Because HBsAg 

prevalence can vary within these regions, additional knowl­

edge about local HBsAg prevalence can be used to guide deci­

sion making regarding testing. 

•	 Persons with behavioral exposures to HBV. MSM and 

past or current IDUs have higher prevalence of chronic 

HBV infection than the overall U.S. population (Table 5) 

and should be tested for chronic HBV infection. Both of 

these populations are recommended for routine hepatitis 

B vaccination (5), and HBsAg testing is recommended as 

a component of prevaccination testing for these adults. 

The first dose of hepatitis B vaccine should be adminis­

tered during the same medical visit with serologic testing. 

However, HBsAg testing is not a requirement for vacci­

nation, and in settings where testing is not feasible, vacci­

nation of recommended populations should continue. 

•	 Persons receiving cytotoxic or immunosuppressive 

therapy. Persons receiving cytotoxic or immunosuppres­

sive therapy (e.g., chemotherapy for malignant diseases, 

immunosuppression related to organ transplantation, and 

immunosuppression for rheumatologic and gastroenter­

ologic disorders) should be tested for serologic markers of 

HBV infection (i.e., HBsAg, anti-HBc, and anti-HBs). 

Prophylactic antiviral therapy can prevent reactivation in 

HBsAg-positive patients (13,101). 


10 

MMWR 

September 19, 2008 

TABLE 4. Populations recommended or required for routine testing for chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection 

Population 

Population-specific testing consideration 

Source 

Persons born in regions of high 

and intermediate HBV endemicity 

(HBsAg* prevalence &gt;2%)† 

U.S.-born persons not vaccinated 

as infants whose parents were 

born in regions with high HBV 

endemicity (&gt;8%) 

Injection-drug users 

Men who have sex with men 

Persons needing immunosuppres­

sive therapy, including chemo­

therapy, immunosuppression 

related to organ transplantation, 

and immunosuppression for 

rheumatologic or gastroenterologic 

disorders 

Persons with elevated ALT/AST§§ 

of unknown etiology 

Donors of blood, plasma, organs, 

tissues, or semen 

Hemodialysis patients 

All pregnant women 

Infants born to HBsAg-positive 

mothers 

All persons (including immigrants, refugees, asylum seekers, and 

internationally adopted children) born in regions with high and 

intermediate endemicity of HBV infection should be tested for 

HBsAg, regardless of vaccination status in their country of origin. 

If not vaccinated as infants in the United States, these persons 

should be tested regardless of maternal HBsAg status. 

• First vaccine dose should be given at the same visit as testing 

for HBsAg.§ 

• Testing for anti-HBc¶ or anti-HBs** should be done as well to 

identify susceptible persons.†† 

• Susceptible persons should complete a 3-dose hepatitis B 

vaccine series to prevent infection from ongoing exposure. 

• First vaccine dose should be given at the same visit as testing 

for HBsAg. 

• Testing for anti-HBc or anti-HBs should be done as well to 

identify susceptible persons. 

• Susceptible persons should complete a 3-dose hepatitis B 

vaccine series to prevent transmission from ongoing exposure. 

• Serologic testing should test for all markers of HBV infection 

(HBsAg, anti-HBc, and anti-HBs). 

• Because of elevated risk of fulminant hepatitis in chronically 

infected persons once suppressive therapy is initiated and risk 

for reactivation in persons with resolved infection, persons who 

are HBsAg-positive should be treated, and persons who are 

anti-HBc positive should be monitored closely for signs of liver 

disease. 

• Testing for HBsAg should be performed along with other 

examination and laboratory testing in the context of medical 

evaluation. 

• To prevent transmission to recipients, HBsAg, anti-HBc, and 

HBV-DNA testing are required. 

• Serologic testing should test for all markers of HBV infection 

(HBsAg, anti-HBc, and anti-HBs) on admission. 

• To prevent transmission in dialysis settings, hemodialysis 

patients should be vaccinated against hepatitis B and 

revaccinated when serum anti-HBs titer falls below 10mIU/mL. 

• HBsAg-positive hemodialysis patients should be cohorted. 

• Vaccine nonresponders should be tested monthly for HBsAg. 

• Women should be tested for HBsAg during each pregnancy, 

preferably in the first trimester. 

• If an HBsAg test result is not available or if the mother was 

at risk for infection during pregnancy, testing should be 

performed at the time of admission for delivery. 

• To prevent perinatal transmission, infants of HBsAg-positive 

mothers and unknown HBsAg status mothers should 

receive vaccination and postexposure immunoprophylaxis 

in accordance with recommendations within 12 hours 

of delivery. 

• Testing for HBsAg and anti-HBs should be performed 1–2 mos 

after completion of at least 3 doses of a licensed hepatitis B 

vaccine series (i.e., at age 9–18 months, generally at the next 

well-child visit) to assess the effectiveness of postexposure 

immunoprophylaxis. Testing should not be performed before age 

9 months or within 1 month of the most recent vaccine dose. 

• Maternal and infant medical records should be reviewed to 

determine whether infant received hepatitis B immune globulin 

and vaccine in accordance with recommendations. 

• CDC. A comprehensive immunization strategy to eliminate 

transmission of hepatitis B virus infection in the United 

States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 

Immunization Practices (ACIP). Part 1: immunization of 

infants, children, and adolescents. MMWR 2005;54(No. 

RR-16) (for persons from regions with HBsAg prevalence 

of &gt;8%). 

• New recommendation (for persons from regions with HBsAg 

prevalence &gt;2%). 

New recommendation. 

New recommendation. 

New recommendation. 

New recommendation. 

New recommendation. 

Code of Federal Regulations. Title 21. Food and Drugs. 

Part 610.40. 

CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of 

infections among chronic hemodialysis patients. MMWR 

2001;50(No. RR-5). 

CDC. A comprehensive immunization strategy to eliminate 

transmission of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: 

recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 

Practices (ACIP). Part 1: immunization of infants, children, and 

adolescents. MMWR 2005;54(No. RR-16). 

CDC. A comprehensive immunization strategy to eliminate 

transmission of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: 

recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 

Practices (ACIP). Part 1: immunization of infants, children, 

and adolescents. MMWR 2005;54(No. RR-16); CDC. 

Recommended adult immunization schedule—United States, 

October 2007–September 2008. MMWR 2007;56(41):Q1–Q4. 


 

Recommendations and Reports 

September 19, 2008 / Vol. 57 / RR-8 



Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 

www.cdc.gov/mmwr 

Continuing Education Activity Sponsored by CDC 

Recommendations for Identification and Public Health Management 

of Persons with Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection 

EXPIRATION — September 19, 2010 

You must complete and return the response form electronically or by mail by 

hours Certified Health Education Specialist (CHES) credit. If you return the 

September 19, 2010, to receive continuing education credit. If you answer all 

form electronically, you will receive educational credit immediately. If you mail 

of the questions, you will receive an award letter for 2.5 hours Continuing 

the form, you will receive educational credit in approximately 30 days. No fees 

Medical Education (CME) credit; 0.2 Continuing Education Units (CEUs); 

are charged for participating in this continuing education activity. 

2.5 contact hours Continuing Nursing Education (CNE) credit; or 2.5 contact 

INSTRUCTIONS 

By Internet 

1.	 Read this MMWR (Vol. 57, RR-8), which contains the correct answers to 

the questions beginning on the next page. 

2.	 Go to the MMWR Continuing Education Internet site at http://www. 

cdc.gov/mmwr/cme/conted.html. 

3.	 Select which exam you want to take and select whether you want to register 

for CME, CEU, CNE, or CHES credit. 

4.	 Fill out and submit the registration form. 

5.	 Select exam questions. To receive continuing education credit, you must 

answer all of the questions. Questions with more than one correct answer 

will instruct you to “Indicate all that apply.” 

6.	 Submit your answers no later than September 19, 2010. 

7.	 Immediately print your Certificate of Completion for your records. 

By Mail or Fax 

1.	 Read this MMWR (Vol. 57, RR-8), which contains the correct answers to 

the questions beginning on the next page. 

2.	 Complete all registration information on the response form, including 

your name, mailing address, phone number, and e-mail address. 

3.	 Indicate whether you are registering for CME, CEU, CNE, or CHES credit. 

4.	 Select your answers to the questions, and mark the corresponding letters on 

the response form. To receive continuing education credit, you must 

answer all of the questions. Questions with more than one correct answer 

will instruct you to “Indicate all that apply.” 

5.	 Sign and date the response form or a photocopy of the form and send no 

later than September 19, 2010, to 

Fax: 404-498-2388 

Mail: MMWR CE Credit 

CCHIS, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 

1600 Clifton Rd, N.E., MS E-90 

Atlanta, GA 30333 

6.	 Your Certificate of Completion will be mailed to you within 30 days. 

ACCREDITATION 

Continuing Medical Education (CME). CDC is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education to provide continuing medical 

education for physicians. CDC designates this educational activity for a maximum of 2.5 hours in category 1 credit toward the AMA Physician’s Recognition 

Award. Each physician should claim only those hours of credit that he/she actually spent in the educational activity. 

Continuing Education Unit (CEU). CDC has been reviewed and approved as an Authorized Provider by the International Association for Continuing Education 

and Training (IACET), 1620 I Street, N.W., Suite 615, Washington, DC 20006. CDC has awarded 0.2 CEUs to participants who successfully complete this 

program. 

Continuing Nursing Education (CNE). CDC is accredited as a provider of continuing nursing education by the American Nurses Credentialing Center’s 

Commission on Accreditation. CDC will award 2.5 contact hour(s) in CNE credit. 

Certified Health Education Specialist (CHES). CDC is a designated provider of continuing education contact hours (CECH) in health education by the 

National Commission for Health Education Credentialing, Inc. This program is a designated event for CHESs to receive 2.5 category I contact hour(s) in health 

education. The CDC provider number is GA0082. 

depar

depar

depar

depar

department of health and human ser

tment of health and human ser

tment of health and human ser

tment of health and human ser

tment of health and human services

vices

vices

vices



Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention




CE-2	 

MMWR 

September 19, 2008 

Goal and Ojectives 

This report updates and expands previous CDC guidelines for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) testing to identify persons with chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) 

infection. The report recommends new populations for HBsAg testing and provides new guidelines regarding evaluation and public health management of 

chronically infected persons. The goal of this report is to guide health-care professionals and public health officials in identifying persons with chronic HBV infection 

and ensuring appropriate public health management of these persons and their contacts. Upon completion of this educational activity, the reader should be able to 

1) identify populations for whom routine HBsAg testing is recommended, 2) identify geographic regions with intermediate or high endemicity of HBV infection, 

3) describe components of public health management for HBsAg-positive persons, and 4) describe strategies to increase implementation of HBsAg testing 

recommendations. 

To receive continuing education credit, please answer all of the following questions. 

1.	 For which of the following populations is routine HBsAg testing 

recommended? (Indicate all that apply.) 

A.	 Persons born in regions with high HBV endemicity (i.e., HBsAg 

seroprevalence of &gt;8%). 

B.	 Persons born in regions with intermediate HBV endemicity (i.e., 

HBsAg seroprevalence of 2%–7%). 

C.	 Men who have sex with men (MSM). 

D. Injection-drug users (IDUs). 

E.	 Pregnant women. 

F.	 Sex partners and household contacts of HBsAg-positive persons. 

G. All of the above. 

2.	 Which of the following statements regarding hepatitis B serologic 

testing are true? (Indicate all that apply.) 

A.	 The finding of HBsAg in serum is usually indicative of acute HBV 

infection. 

B.	 To determine susceptibility among persons at ongoing risk for HBV 

infection and for whom hepatitis B vaccination is recommended, 

serologic testing should assess for the presence of anti-HBc or anti-HBs 

in addition to HBsAg. 

C.	 Chronic HBV infection can be confirmed by the persistence of HBsAg 

or HBV DNA for at least 6 months. 

D. The presence of anti-HBe in serum indicates high levels of viral 

replication. 

E.	 All of the above. 

3.	 Which of the following geographic areas have intermediate or high 

endemicity of HBV infection (i.e., HBsAg prevalence of &gt;2%)? 

(Indicate all that apply.) 

A.	 South East Asia. 

B.	 The Pacific Islands. 

C.	 Sub-Saharan Africa. 

D. Australia. 

E.	 Western Europe. 

4.	 In countries with high HBV endemicity, the majority of HBV 

infections occur among infants and young children. 

A.	 True. 

B.	 False. 

5.	 Which of the following statements regarding HBsAg testing 

recommendations are true? (Indicate all that apply.) 

A.	 HBsAg testing is recommended for persons born in HBV-endemic 

countries who were vaccinated against hepatitis B in their country of 

origin. 

B.	 U.S.-born MSM and IDUs who completed the hepatitis B vaccine 

series as infants do not need to be tested for HBsAg. 

C.	 HBsAg testing is recommended for immunosuppressive or cytotoxic 

therapy candidates. 

D. All of the above. 

6.	 For persons with ongoing behavioral risk factors for HBV infection, 

hepatitis B vaccination should be delayed until HBsAg test results are 

obtained. 

A.	 True. 

B.	 False. 

7.	 Identification of HBsAg-positive persons permits which of the 

following? (Indicate all that apply.) 

A.	 Referral of chronically infected persons for medical evaluation and 

monitoring. 

B.	 Identification and vaccination of susceptible sex partners and 

household contacts. 

C.	 Documentation necessary for reporting to the National Chronic 

Hepatitis B Registry. 

D. The opportunity to tailor medical care for patients receiving 

immunosuppressive therapy to prevent reactivation of HBV infection. 

E.	 The opportunity to protect newborns of HBsAg-positive mothers by 

administering hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B vaccine 

beginning at birth. 

8.	 Which of the following patient education messages are recommended 

for HBsAg-positive persons? (Indicate all that apply.) 

A.	 Persons with chronic HBV infection should avoid or limit alcohol 

consumption. 

B.	 When seeking medical or dental care, HBsAg-positive persons should 

inform those responsible for their care of their HBsAg status so they 

can be evaluated and their care managed appropriately. 

C.	 HBsAg-positive persons should use methods (e.g., condoms) to 

protect nonimmune sex partners from acquiring HBV infection until 

the sex partners can be vaccinated and their immunity documented. 

D. HBsAg-positive persons should be advised to cover cuts and lesions to 

avoid spreading infectious blood or secretions to others. 

E.	 All of the above. 

9.	 The majority of state health departments have implemented programs 

to identify persons with chronic HBV infection, provide case 

management, and refer patients for care. 

A.	 True. 

B.	 False. 

10. Which best describes your professional activities? 

A.	 Physician. 

B.	 Nurse. 

C.	 Health educator. 

D. Office staff. 

E.	 Other. 

11. I plan to use these recommendations as the basis for …(Indicate all 

that apply.) 

A.	 health education materials. 

B.	 insurance reimbursement policies. 

C.	 local practice guidelines. 

D. public policy. 

E.	 other. 


 

 

MMWR







To receive continuing education credit, you must

1. provide your contact information (please print or type); 

2. indicate your choice of CME, CME for nonphysicians, CEU, CNE, or CHES credit.

3. answer all of the test questions;

4. sign and date this form or a photocopy;

5. submit your answer form by September 19, 2010





Check One

Apartment 

or 

Credit

CEU Credit

Suite 

CNE Credit

CHES Credit 

Last Name (print or type) 

First Name 

CME Credit

CME for

Nonphysicians

Street Address or P.O. Box

City 

State 

ZIP Code 

Phone Number 

Fax Number 

E-Mail Address

Fill in the appropriate blocks to indicate your answers. Remember, you must answer all of the

questions to receive continuing education credit!

1. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E [  ] F [ ] G 

14. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

2. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

15. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

3. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

16. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

4. [  ] A [  ] B 

17. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

5. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D 

18. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

6. [  ] A [  ] B 

19. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

7. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

20. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

8. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

21. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

9. [  ] A [  ] B 

22. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

10. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

23. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

11. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

24. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

12. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

25. [  ] A [  ] B 

Vol. 57 / No. RR-8 

Recommendations and Reports 

CE-3 

12. Overall, the length of the journal report was… 

16. After reading this report, I am confident I describe strategies to 

increase implementation of HBsAg testing recommendations.

A. much too long. 

B. a little too long. 

A. Strongly agree. 

C. just right. 

B. Agree. 

D. a little too short. 

C. Undecided. 

E. much too short. 

D. Disagree. 

E. Strongly disagree.

13. After reading this report, I am confident I can identify populations for 

whom routine HBsAg testing is recommended. 

17. The learning outcomes (objectives) were relevant to the goals of this 

report.

A. Strongly agree. 

B. Agree. 

A. Strongly agree. 

C. Undecided. 

B. Agree. 

D. Disagree. 

C. Undecided. 

E. Strongly disagree. 

D. Disagree. 

E. Strongly disagree.

14. After reading this report, I am confident I can identify geographic 

regions with intermediate or high endemicity of HBV infection. 

18. The instructional strategies used in this report (text, tables, and 

figures) helped me learn the material.

A. Strongly agree. 

B. Agree. 

A. Strongly agree. 

C. Undecided. 

B. Agree. 

D. Disagree. 

C. Undecided. 

E. Strongly disagree. 

D. Disagree. 

E. Strongly disagree.

15. After reading this report, I am confident I can describe components of 

public health management for HBsAg-positive persons. 

19. The content was appropriate given the stated objectives of the report. 

A. Strongly agree. 

A. Strongly agree. 

B. Agree. 

B. Agree. 

C. Undecided. 

C. Undecided. 

D. Disagree. 

D. Disagree. 

E. Strongly disagree. 

E. Strongly disagree. 

(Continued on pg CE-4) 

Detach or photocopy. 

13. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E 

26. [  ] A [  ] B [  ] C [  ] D [  ] E [  ] F 

Signature 

Date I Completed Exam 


CE-4 

MMWR 

September 19, 2008 

20. The content expert(s) demonstrated expertise in the subject matter. 

A. Strongly agree. 

B. Agree. 

C. Undecided. 

D. Disagree. 

E. Strongly disagree. 

21. Overall, the quality of the journal report was excellent. 

A. Strongly agree. 

B. Agree. 

C. Undecided. 

D. Disagree. 

E. Strongly disagree. 

22. These recommendations will improve the quality of my practice. 

A. Strongly agree. 

B. Agree. 

C. Undecided. 

D. Disagree. 

E. Strongly disagree. 

23. The availability of continuing education credit influenced my 

decision to read this report. 

A. Strongly agree. 

B. Agree. 

C. Undecided. 

D. Disagree. 

E. Strongly disagree. 

24. The MMWR format was conducive to learning this content. 

A. Strongly agree. 

B. Agree. 

C. Undecided. 

D. Disagree. 

E. Strongly disagree. 

25. Do you feel this course was commercially biased? (Indicate yes or no; 

if yes, please explain in the space provided.) 

A. Yes. 

B. No. 

26. How did you learn about the continuing education activity? 

A. Internet. 

B. Advertisement (e.g., fact sheet, MMWR cover, newsletter, or journal). 

C. Coworker/supervisor. 

D. Conference presentation. 

E. MMWR subscription. 

F. Other. 

Correct answers for questions 1–9. 1. G; 2. B and C; 3. A, B, and C; 4. 

A; 5. D; 6. B; 7. A, B, D, and E; 8. E; and 9. B. 

DEP

DEP

DEP

DEP

DEPARTMENT OF HEAL

ARTMENT OF HEAL

ARTMENT OF HEAL

ARTMENT OF HEAL

ARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SER

TH AND HUMAN SER

TH AND HUMAN SER

TH AND HUMAN SER

TH AND HUMAN SERVICES

VICES

VICES

VICES

VICES 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 

Atlanta, Georgia 30333 

Official Business

Official Business

Official Business

Official Business

Official Business 

Penalty for Private Use $300 



FIRST CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 99110 ATLANTA, GA 30333 

Postage Will Be Paid by Department of Health and Human Services 

MMWR CE CREDIT 

COORDINATING CENTER FOR HEALTH INFORMATION 

AND SERVICE — MAILSTOP E-90 

CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION 

1600 CLIFTON RD., N.E. 

ATLANTA, GEORGIA 30333 


11 

Vol. 57 / RR-8	 

Recommendations and Reports 

TABLE 4. (Continued ) Populations recommended or required for routine testing for chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection 

Population 

Population-specific testing consideration 

Source 

Household,needle-sharing, or sex 

contacts of persons known to be 

HBsAg positive 

Persons who are the sources of 

blood or body fluids for exposures 

that might require postexposure 

prophylaxis (e.g., needlestick, 

sexual assault) 

HIV-positive persons 

• First vaccine dose should be administered at the same visit as 

testing for HBsAg. 

• Testing for anti-HBc or anti-HBs should be performed as well to 

identify susceptible persons. 

• Susceptible persons should complete a 3-dose hepatitis B 

vaccine series to prevent transmission from ongoing exposure. 

• Test source person for HBsAg and provide exposed person 

with postexposure prophylaxis if needed. 

• High levels of vaccination coverage among health-care workers 

have led to marked decreases in hepatitis B incidence. Health-

care and public safety workers with reasonably anticipated 

occupational exposures to blood or infectious body fluids 

should be vaccinated against hepatitis B. 

• Test for HBsAg and anti-HBc and/or anti-HBs. 

• Susceptible persons should be vaccinated against hepatitis B to 

prevent transmission from ongoing exposure. 

• HIV infection can accelerate progression of HBV-related liver 

disease. 

• Antiretroviral medications used to treat HIV infection also have 

anti-HBV activity. Medical regimens for HIV management can 

be tailored according to patient HBV status. 

CDC. A comprehensive immunization strategy to eliminate 

transmission of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: 

recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 

Practices (ACIP). Part 1: immunization of infants, children, and 

adolescents. MMWR 2005;54(No. RR-16). 

CDC. Updated U.S. Public Health Service guidelines for the 

management of occupational exposures to HBV, HCV, and 

HIV and recommendations for postexposure prophylaxis. 

MMWR 2001;50(No. RR-11). 

CDC. Treating opportunistic infections among HIV-infected 

adults and adolescents: recommendations from CDC, 

the National Institutes of Health, and the HIV Medicine 

Association/Infectious Diseases Society of America. MMWR 

2004;53(No. RR-15). 

* Hepatitis B surface antigen. 

† High endemicity = HBsAg prevalence of &gt;8%; intermediate endemicity = HBsAg prevalence of 2%–7%. 

§ Unless an established patient-provider relation can ensure that the patient will return for serologic test results and that vaccination can be initiated at that time if the patient 

is susceptible. 

¶ Antibody to hepatitis B core antigen. 

** Antibody to HBsAg. 

†† Persons lacking immunity, either vaccine-induced or following resolved infection, to HBV infection. 

§§ ALT = alanine aminotransferase; AST = aspartate aminotransferase. 

•	 Persons with liver disease of unknown eiology. All per­

sons with persistently elevated ALT or aspartate amino­

transferase (AST) levels of unknown etiology should be 

tested for HBsAg as part of the medical evaluation of 

these abnormal laboratory values. 

Testing Persons With a History 

of Vaccination 

Because some persons might have been infected with HBV 

before they received hepatitis B vaccination, HBsAg testing is 

recommended regardless of vaccination history for the 

following populations: 

•	 Persons born in geographic regions with HBV preva­

lence of &gt;2%. The majority of these persons were born 

either before full implementation of routine infant hepa­

titis B vaccination in their countries of origin or during a 

period when newborn vaccination programs were in the 

early stages of implementation. Because of the difficulty 

in verifying the vaccination status of foreign-born per­

sons and the high rate of perinatal and early childhood 

HBV transmission before implementation of routine 

infant hepatitis B vaccination programs, HBsAg testing 

is recommended for all persons born in regions with high 

or intermediate endemicity of HBV infection even if they 

were vaccinated in their country of origin. 

•	 U.S.-born persons not vaccinated as infants whose 

parents were born in regions with high HBV ende­

micity (&gt;8%). Because of the high efficacy of hepatitis B 

vaccination, persons with HBsAg-negative mothers who 

completed the vaccine series as infants in the United States 

do not need to be tested for HBsAg. However, persons 

vaccinated through catch-up programs as children or ado­

lescents also should be tested if they were likely to have 

had HBV exposures before vaccination. Prevalence of 

chronic HBV infection is high among U.S.-born chil­

dren who were not vaccinated as infants and whose par­

ents were born in regions with high HBV endemicity. 

•	 Persons who received hepatitis B vaccination as ado­

lescents or adults after the initiation of risk behaviors. 

MSM and IDUs who were potentially exposed to HBV 

(e.g., through sexual activity or injection-drug use) 

before vaccination should be tested for HBsAg. 

Management of Persons Tested 

for Chronic HBV Infection 

Vaccination at the Time of Testing 

Persons to be tested who have been recommended to 

receive hepatitis B vaccination, including those in settings in 

which universal vaccination is recommended (i.e., sexually 


12 

MMWR 

September 19, 2008 

TABLE 5. Prevalence of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, by U.S. population group 

Chronically infected with HBV* 

Ever infected with HBV† 

Population 

(%) 

(%) 

General§ 

0.3 

4.8 

(95% CI¶ = 0.2–0.4) 

(95% CI = 4.2–5.5) 

HIV**-positive persons†† 

4–17 

24–76 

Injection-drug users§§ 

3–6 

20–70 

Men who have sex with men¶¶ 

1–3 

10–40 

Sexual contacts of HBsAg+ persons*** 

3.5–9 

25–59 

Household contacts of persons with chronic HBV infection††† 

3–20 

15–60 

* Hepatitis B surface antigen–positive. 

† 

§ Source:

¶ 

** Human immunodeficiency virus. 

†† Source: Alter, MJ. Epidemiology of viral hepatitis and HIV co-infection. J Hepatol 2006;44(1 Suppl):S6–9. 

§§ Sources: Lopez-Zetina J, Kerndt P, Ford W, Woerhle T, Weber M. Prevalence of HIV and hepatitis B and self-reported injection risk behavior during 

detention among street-recruited injection drug users in Los Angeles County, 1994–1996. Addiction 2001;96:589–95; Des Jarlais DC, Diaz T, Perlis T, 

et al. Variability in the incidence of human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus infection among young injecting drug users 

in New York City. Am J Epidemiol 2003;157:467–71; Garfein RS, Vlahov D, Galai N, Doherty MC, Nelson KE. Viral infections in short-term injection 

drug users: the prevalence of the hepatitis C, hepatitis B, human immunodeficiency, and human T-lymphotropic viruses. Am J Public Health 1996;86:655– 

61; Kunches LM, Craven DE, Werner BG. Seroprevalence of hepatitis B virus and delta agent in parenteral drug abusers. Immunogenicity of hepatitis 

B vaccine. Am J Med 1986;81:591–5; Raimondo G, Smedile A, Gallo L, Balbo A, Ponzetto A, Rizzetto M. Multicentre study of prevalence of HBV-

associated delta infection and liver disease in drug-addicts. Lancet 1982;1:249–51; Zeldis JB, Jain S, Kuramoto IK, et al. Seroepidemiology of viral 

infections among intravenous drug users in northern California. West J Med 1992;156:30–5; Mangla JC, Kim YM, Brown MR, Schwob D, Hanson SE. 

Liver tests, HB-Ag and HB-Ab in asymptomatic drug addicts. Am J Gastroenterol 1976;65:121–6; Seeff LB, Zimmerman HJ, Wright EC, et al. Hepatic 

disease in asymptomatic parenteral narcotic drug abusers: a Veterans Administration collaborative study. Am J Med Sci 1975;270:41–7; Cherubin CE, 

Schaefer RA, Rosenthal WS, et al. The natural history of liver disease in former drug users. Am J Med Sci 1976;272:244–53; Blanck RR, Ream N, 

Conrad M. Hepatitis B antigen and antibody in heroin users. Am J Gastroenterol 1979;71:164–7; Kellerman SE, Hanson DL, McNaghten AD, Fleming 

PL. Prevalence of chronic hepatitis B and incidence of acute hepatitis B infection in human immunodeficiency virus-infected subjects. J Infect Dis 

2003;188:571–7; Hagan H, McGough JP, Thiede H, Weiss NS, Hopkins S, Alexander ER. Syringe exchange and risk of infection with hepatitis B and 

C viruses. Am J Epidemiol 1999;149:203–13; Kuo I, Sherman SG, Thomas DL, Strathdee SA. Hepatitis B virus infection and vaccination among young 

injection and non-injection drug users: missed opportunities to prevent infection. Drug Alcohol Depend 2004;73:69–78. 

¶¶ Source: Weinbaum CM, Rob Lyerla R, MacKellar DA, et al. The Young Men’s Survey phase II: hepatitis B immunization and infection among young 

men who have sex with men. Am J Public Health 2008;98:839–45. 

*** Sources: Heathcote J, Gateau P, Sherlock S. Role of hepatitis-B antigen carriers in non-parenteral transmission of the hepatitis-B virus. Lancet 

1974;2:370–1; Bernier RH, Sampliner R, Gerety R, Tabor E, Hamilton F, Nathanson N. Hepatitis B infection in households of chronic carriers of hepatitis 

B surface antigen: factors associated with prevalence of infection. Am J Epidemiol 1982;116:199–211; Irwin GR, Allen AM, Bancroft WH, Karwacki JJ, 

Pinkerton RH, Russell PK. Hepatitis B antigen and antibody. Occurrence in families of asymptomatic HB AG carriers. JAMA 1974;227:1042–3. 

†††Sources: Hurie MB, Mast EE, Davis JP. Horizontal transmission of hepatitis B virus infection to United States-born children of Hmong refugees. 

Pediatrics 1992;89:269–73; Mahoney FJ, Lawrence M, Scott C, Le Q, Lambert S, Farley TA. Continuing risk for hepatitis B virus transmission among 

Southeast Asian infants in Louisiana. Pediatrics 1995;96:1113–6; Franks AL, Berg CJ, Kane MA, et al. Hepatitis B infection among children born in the 

United States to southeast Asian refugees. N Engl J Med 1989;321:1305. 

transmitted disease [STD]/HIV testing and treatment facili-

Public Health Management 

ties, drug-abuse treatment and prevention settings, health-care 

of HBsAg-Positive Persons 

settings targeting services to IDUs, health-care settings tar-

The finding of HBsAg in serum is indicative of chronic 

geting services to MSM, and correctional facilities) should 

HBV infection unless the person has signs or symptoms of 

receive the first dose of vaccine at the same medical visit after 

acute hepatitis. All HBsAg-positive laboratory results should 

blood is drawn for testing unless an established patient-

be reported to the state or local health department, in accor­

provider relation can ensure that the patient will return for 

dance with state requirements for reporting of acute and 

serologic test results and that vaccination can be initiated at 

chronic HBV infection. Chronic HBV infection can be con-

that time if the patient is susceptible. In venues where vacci­

firmed by verifying the presence of HBsAg in a serum sample 

nation is recommended and testing is not feasible, vaccina­

taken at least 6 months after the first test, or by the absence of

tion still should be provided for all populations for whom it is 

IgM anti-HBc in the original specimen. Standard case defini­

recommended. 

tions for the classification of reportable cases of HBV infec­

tion have been published previously (124). 


 

13 

Vol. 57 / RR-8 

Recommendations and Reports 

Contact Management 

Sex partners and household and needle-sharing contacts of 

HBsAg-positive persons should be identified. Unvaccinated 

past and present sex partners and household and needle-

sharing contacts should be tested for HBsAg and for anti-

HBc and/or anti-HBs and should receive the first dose of 

hepatitis B vaccine as soon as the blood sample for serologic 

testing has been collected. Susceptible persons should com­

plete the vaccine series using an age-appropriate vaccine dose 

and schedule. Those who have not been vaccinated fully should 

complete the vaccine series. Contacts determined to be HBsAg­

positive should be referred for medical care. 

Health-care providers and public health authorities treat­

ing persons with chronic HBV infection should obtain the 

names of their sex contacts and household members and a 

history of drug use. Providers then can help to arrange for 

evaluation and vaccination of contacts, either directly or 

with assistance from state and local health departments. Con­

tact notification is well-established in public STD programs; 

these programs have the expertise to reach identified contacts 

of HBsAg-positive patients and might be able to provide guid­

ance on procedures and best practices, or in programs with 

sufficient capacity, offer assistance to other providers to reach 

identified contacts. With sufficient resources, identification 

of contacts should be accompanied by health counseling and 

include referral of patients and their contacts for other 

services when appropriate. 

The success of contact management for hepatitis B has var­

ied widely, depending on local resources. One study deter­

mined that approximately half of providers caring for patients 

with chronic HBV infection recommended contact vaccina­

tion, and &lt;20% of contacts initiated vaccination (125). In 

the national perinatal hepatitis B prevention program, approxi­

mately 26% of all persons identified as contacts by HBsAg­

positive women were tested and evaluated for vaccination by 

public health departments (CDC, unpublished data, 2005). 

In several state and local programs with targeted efforts for 

adult hepatitis B prevention, up to 85% of identified contacts 

have been evaluated (CDC, unpublished data, 2005); how­

ever, many states and cities have no contact identification pro­

grams outside the perinatal hepatitis B prevention program. 

Given the potential for contact notification to disrupt net­

works of HBV transmission and reduce disease incidence, 

health-care providers should encourage patients with HBV 

infection to notify their sex partners, household members, and 

injection-drug–sharing contacts and urge them to seek medi­

cal evaluation, testing, and vaccination. 

Patient Education 

Medical providers should advise patients identified as HBsAg 

positive regarding measures they can take to prevent trans­

mission to others and protect their health or refer patients for 

counseling if needed. Patient education should be conducted 

in a culturally sensitive manner in the patient’s primary lan­

guage (both written and oral whenever possible). Ideally 

bilingual, bicultural, medically trained interpreters should be 

used when indicated. 

• To prevent or reduce the risk for transmission to others, 

HBsAg-positive persons should be advised to 

— notify their household, sex, and needle-sharing con­

tacts that they should be tested for markers of HBV 

infection, vaccinated against hepatitis B, and, if sus­

ceptible, complete the hepatitis B vaccine series; 

— use methods (e.g., condoms) to protect nonimmune 

sex partners from acquiring HBV infection from sexual 

activity until the sex partners can be vaccinated and 

their immunity documented (HBsAg-positive persons 

should be made aware that use of condoms and other 

prevention methods also might reduce their risks for 

HIV infection and other STDs); 

— cover cuts and skin lesions to prevent the spread of 

infectious secretions or blood; 

— clean blood spills with bleach solution (126); 

— refrain from donating blood, plasma, tissue, or semen; 

— refrain from sharing household articles (e.g., tooth­

brushes, razors, or personal injection equipment) that 

could become contaminated with blood; and 

— dispose of blood and body fluids and medical waste 

properly. 

• HBsAg-positive pregnant women should be advised of 

the need for their newborns to receive hepatitis B vaccine 

and hepatitis B immune globulin beginning at birth and 

to complete the hepatitis B vaccine series according to 

the recommended immunization schedule. 

• To protect the liver from further harm, HBsAg-positive 

persons should be advised to 

— seek health-care services from a provider experienced 

in the management of hepatitis B; 

— avoid or limit alcohol consumption because of the 

effects of alcohol on the liver, with referral to care pro­

vided for persons needing evaluation or treatment for 

alcohol abuse; and 

— obtain vaccination against hepatitis A (2 doses, 

6–18 months apart) if chronic liver disease is present. 

• When seeking medical or dental care, HBsAg-positive 

persons should be advised to inform those responsible for 


 

14 

MMWR 

September 19, 2008 

their care of their HBsAg status so they can be evaluated 

and their care managed appropriately. 

Other counseling messages include the following: 

• HBV is not spread by breastfeeding, kissing, hugging, 

coughing, ingesting food or water, sharing eating utensils 

or drinking glasses, or casual touching (5). 

• Persons should not be excluded from school, play, child 

care, work, or other settings on the basis of their HBsAg 

status, unless they are prone to biting (127). 

• HBV-infected health-care workers should follow published 

guidelines (128) and applicable state laws and regulations 

regarding recommended practices to reduce the risk of 

HBV transmission in the workplace.* 

• Involvement with a support group might help patients 

cope with chronic HBV infection. 

Medical Management of Chronic 

Hepatitis B 

Because 15%–25% of persons with chronic HBV infection 

are at risk for premature death from cirrhosis and liver cancer, 

persons with chronic HBV infection should be evaluated soon 

after infection is identified by referral to or in consultation 

with a physician experienced in the management of chronic 

liver disease. When assessing chronic HBV infection, the phy­

sician must consider the level of HBV replication and the 

degree of liver injury. Injury is assessed using serial tests of 

serum aminotransferases (ALT and AST), and, when needed, 

liver biopsy (histologic activity and fibrosis scores). 

Initial evaluation of patients with chronic HBV infection 

should include a thorough history and physical examination, 

with special emphasis on risk factors for coinfection with HIV 

and HCV, alcohol use, and family history of HBV infection 

and liver cancer. Laboratory testing should assess for indica­

tors of liver disease (complete blood count and liver panel), 

markers of HBV replication (HBeAg, anti-HBe, HBV DNA), 

coinfection with HCV, HDV, and HIV, and antibody to hepa­

titis A virus (HAV) (if local HAV prevalence makes prevac­

cination testing cost effective) (109). Where testing is available, 

schistosomiasis (S. mansoni or S. japonicum) also should be 

assessed for persons from endemic areas (129) because schis­

tosomiasis might increase progression to cirrhosis or HCC in 

the presence of HBV infection (130,131). Persons with chronic 

HBV infection who are not known to be immune to HAV 

should receive 2 doses of hepatitis A vaccine 6–18 months 

apart. Baseline alfa fetoprotein assay (AFP) is used to assess 

* Disagreement exists internationally about best practices for avoiding 

transmission of HBV from health-care worker to patient (53). 

for evidence of HCC at initial diagnosis of HBV infection, 

and ultrasound in patients at risk of HCC (i.e., Asian men 

aged &gt;40 years, Asian women aged &gt;50 years, persons with cir­

rhosis, persons with a family history of HCC, Africans aged 

&gt;20 years, and HBV-infected persons aged &gt;40 years with per­

sistent or intermittent ALT elevation and/or high HBV DNA) 

(13,108). Liver biopsy (or, ideally, noninvasive markers) can be 

used to assess inflammation and fibrosis if initial laboratory 

assays suggest liver damage, as per published practice guide­

lines for liver biopsy in chronic HBV infection (13). 

Following an initial evaluation, all patients with chronic 

HBV infection, even those with normal aminotransferase lev­

els, should receive lifelong monitoring to assess progression of 

liver disease, development of HCC, need for treatment, and 

response to treatment. Frequency of monitoring depends on 

several factors, including family history, age, and the condi­

tion of the patient; monitoring schedules have been recom­

mended by several authorities (13,106,107,132). 

Therapy for hepatitis B is a rapidly changing area of clinical 

practice. Seven therapies have been approved by FDA for the 

treatment of chronic HBV infection: interferon alfa-2b, 

peginterferon alfa-2a, lamivudine, adefovir dipivoxil, entecavir, 

telbivudine, and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (13,106,132, 

133). In addition, at least two other FDA-approved oral anti­

viral medications for HIV (clevudine and emtricitabine) are 

undergoing phase-3 trials for HBV treatment and might be 

approved soon for chronic hepatitis B. Treatment decisions 

are made on the basis of HBeAg status, HBV DNA viral load, 

ALT, stage of liver disease, age of patient, and other factors 

(13,32,134). 

Coinfection with HIV complicates the management of 

patients with chronic hepatitis B. When selecting antiretrovirals 

for HIV treatment, the provider must consider the patient’s 

HBsAg status to avoid liver-associated complications and 

development of antiviral resistance. Management of these 

patients has been described elsewhere (135). 

Serologic endpoints of antiviral therapy are loss of HBeAg, 

HBeAg seroconversion in persons initially HBeAg positive, 

suppression of HBV DNA to undetectable levels by sensitive 

PCR-based assays in patients who are HBeAg-negative and 

anti-HBe positive, and loss of HBsAg. Optimal duration of 

therapy has not been established. For HBeAg-positive patients, 

treatment should be continued for at least 6 months after loss 

of HBeAg and appearance of anti-HBe (13); for HBeAg­

negative/anti-HBe-positive patients, relapse rates are 80%– 

90% if treatment is stopped in 1–2 years (13). Viral resistance 

to lamivudine occurs in up to 70% of persons during the first 

5 years of treatment (32). Lower rates of resistance among 

treatment-naïve patients have been observed with adefovir 


 

15 

Vol. 57 / RR-8 

Recommendations and Reports 

(30% in 5 years), entecavir (&lt;1% at 4 years), and telbivudine 

(2.3%–5% in 1 year) (136) but more resistance might occur 

with longer usage or among patients who developed resistance 

previously to lamivudine. Although combination therapy has 

not demonstrated a higher rate of response than that using 

the most potent antiviral medication in the regimen, more 

studies are needed using combinations of different classes of 

different medications active against HBV to determine if com­

bination therapy will reduce the rate of the development of 

resistance. 

Development of Surveillance Registries 

of Persons with Chronic HBV Infection 

Information systems, or registries, of persons with chronic 

HBV infection can facilitate the notification, counseling, and 

medical management of persons with chronic HBV infection. 

These registries can be used to distinguish newly reported cases 

of infection from previously identified cases, facilitate and track 

case follow-up, enable communication with case contacts and 

medical providers, and provide local, state, and national esti­

mates of the proportion of persons with chronic HBV infec­

tion who have been identified. Public health agencies use 

registries for patient case management as part of disease con­

trol programs for HIV and tuberculosis; for tracking cancers; 

and for identifying disease trends, treatment successes, and 

outcomes. Chronic HBV registries can similarly be used as a 

tool for public health program and clinical management. 

Widespread registry use for chronic HBV infection will be 

facilitated by the development of better algorithms for 

deduplication (i.e., methods to ensure that each infected per­

son is represented only once), routine electronic reporting of 

laboratory results, and improved communication with labo­

ratories. 

A tiered approach to establishing a registry might allow pro­

grams to increase incrementally the number of data elements 

collected and the expected extent of follow-up as resources 

become available. The specific data elements to be included 

will depend upon the objectives of the registry and the feasi­

bility of collecting that information. At a minimum, suffi­

cient information should be collected to distinguish newly 

identified persons from those reported previously, including 

demographic characteristics and serologic test results. If an 

IgM anti-HBc result is not reported, information about the 

clinical characteristics of the patient (e.g., presence of symp­

toms consistent with acute viral hepatitis, date of symptom 

onset, and results of liver enzyme testing) and the reason for 

testing can help ensure that the registry includes only persons 

with chronic infection and excludes those with acute disease. 

Including data elements on ethnicity and/or country of birth 

can assist in targeting interventions, and information about 

contacts identified and managed and medical referrals made 

can be used to review program needs. 

Collaboration between the registry and the perinatal hepa­

titis B prevention program is important to ensure that the 

registry captures data on women and infants with chronic 

infection identified through the perinatal hepatitis B preven­

tion program. Conversely, the perinatal hepatitis B preven­

tion program can use registry data to identify outcomes for 

infants born to infected women who might have been lost to 

follow-up. Periodic cross-matches with local cancer registry 

and death certificate data can allow a program to estimate the 

contribution of chronic HBV infection to cancer and death 

rates. Guidelines that clarify how and when data with or with­

out personal identifiers are transmitted and used should be 

developed to facilitate the protection of confidential data. 





Health departments provide clinical services in a variety of 

settings serving persons recommended for HBsAg testing, 

including many foreign-born persons, MSM, and IDUs. Ide­

ally, HBsAg testing should be available in venues such as home­

less shelters, jails, STD treatment clinics, and refugee clinics 

because of the increased representation of IDUs and former 

IDUs in homeless shelters (58% drug users [137]), substance 

abuse treatment programs (13%–50% IDUs [138,139]), and 

correctional facilities (25% IDUs [140]) and the over-

representation of IDUs and MSM in STD clinics (6% IDUs 

and 10% MSM [141]), prevalence of chronic HBV infection is 

likely to be higher in these settings. However, few states have 

resources to implement HBsAg testing programs in these set­

tings and rely instead on limited community programs for 

needed public health and medical management. 

In 2008, CDC supported adult viral hepatitis prevention 

coordinators (AVHPCs) in 49 states, the District of Colum­

bia, and five cities (Los Angeles, Chicago, New York City, 

Philadelphia, and Houston) who assist in integrating hepati­

tis A and hepatitis B vaccination, hepatitis B and hepatitis C 

testing, and prevention services among MSM, IDUs, and 

at-risk heterosexuals treated in STD clinics, HIV testing pro­

grams, substance abuse treatment centers, correctional facili­

ties, and other venues. AVHPCs can promote the 

implementation of hepatitis B screening for MSM and IDUs. 

Testing in refugee and immigrant health centers and other 

health-care venues is needed to reach U.S. residents born in 

regions with HBsAg prevalence of &gt;2% (142); AVHPCs also 

can collaborate within these settings to ensure that persons 

from HBV-endemic regions are tested for HBsAg. 


16 

MMWR 

September 19, 2008 

CDC’s perinatal hepatitis B prevention program provides 

case management for HBsAg-positive mothers and their 

infants, including educating mothers and providers about 

appropriate follow-up and medical management (143). This 

program currently identifies 12,000–13,000 HBsAg-positive 

pregnant women each year (CDC, unpublished data, 2007). 

Although perinatal prevention programs provide follow-up 

for infants born to HBV infected women, the majority of states 

and local perinatal prevention programs lack staff to offer care 

referrals for HBV infected pregnant women. 

Multiple health-care providers play a role in identifying 

persons with chronic HBV infection and should seek ways to 

implement testing for chronic HBV in clinical settings: pri­

mary care, obstetrician, and other physician offices, refugee 

clinics, TB clinics, substance abuse treatment programs, 

dialysis clinics, employee health clinics, university health clin­

ics, and other venues. Medical compliance with testing rec­

ommendations already is high for certain populations, 

particularly among those who typically receive care in hospi­

tals or other health-care settings in which HBsAg testing is 

routine. For example, 99% of pregnant women deliver their 

infants in hospitals and 89%–96% of them are tested for HBV 

infection (144; CDC, unpublished data, 2007), and suscep­

tible dialysis patients are tested monthly for HBsAg (119). 

However, compliance with testing recommendations is lower 

in other settings. One study indicated that testing was per­

formed for 30%–50% of persons born in regions with high 

HBsAg prevalence who were seen in public primary care clin­

ics (145). Even in settings in which persons are tested rou­

tinely for HBsAg, more efforts are needed to educate, evaluate, 

and refer clients for appropriate medical follow-up. CDC sup­

ports education and training grants that help educate provid­

ers to screen patients at risk for chronic hepatitis B. Prevention 

research is needed to guide the delivery of hepatitis B screen­

ing in diverse clinical and community settings. 

In addition, community outreach and education, conducted 

through developing partnerships between health departments 

and community organizations, is needed to encourage com­

munity members to seek HBsAg testing. These partnerships 

might be particularly important to overcome social and cul­

tural barriers to testing and care among members of racial 

and ethnic minority populations who are unfamiliar with the 

U.S. health-care system. Advisory groups of community rep­

resentatives, providers who treat patients for chronic hepatitis 

B, providers whose patient populations represent populations 

with high prevalence, and professional medical organizations 

can guide health departments in developing communications 

and prioritizing hepatitis B screening efforts. 

The lack of sufficient resources for management of infected 

persons can be a barrier to implementation of screening pro­

grams. All persons with HBV infection, including those who 

lack insurance and resources, will need ongoing medical man­

agement and possibly therapy. This demand for care will 

increase as screening increases, and additional providers will 

be needed with expertise in the rapidly evolving field of hepa­

titis B monitoring and treatment. 

Acknowledgments 

The following persons provided consultation and guidance in 

the preparation of this report: Miriam J. Alter, PhD, University of 

Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas; Mary 

B. Barton, MD, MPP, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 

Rockville, Maryland; Molli C. Conti, Hepatitis B Foundation, 

Doylestown, Pennsylvania; Adrian DiBisceglie, MD, St. Louis 

University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Kristen 

R. Ehresmann, MPH, Minnesota Department of Health, St. Paul, 

Minnesota; Susan I. Gerber, MD, Chicago Department of Public 

Health, Chicago, Illinois; Beau Gratzner, MPP, Howard Brown 

Health Center, Chicago, Illinois; Ken J. Hoffman, MD, Substance 

Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Rockville, 

Maryland; Jay H. Hoofnagle, MD, National Institutes of Health, 

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 

Bethesda, Maryland; Sandra Huang, MD, San Francisco 

Department of Public Health, San Francisco, California; W. Ray 

Kim, MD, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota; 

Anna Suk-Fong Lok, MD, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 

Michigan; Brian McMahon, MD, Alaska Native Tribal Health 

Consortium, Anchorage, Alaska; Alawode Oladele, MD, DeKalb 

County Board of Health, Decatur, Georgia; Henry J. Pollack, MD, 

New York University Medical Center, New York, New York; Samuel 

So, MD, Asian Liver Center at Stanford University, Stanford, 

California; William Stauffer, MD, DTM&amp;H, University of 

Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Diana L. Sylvestre, MD, 

University of California, San Francisco, Oakland, California; 

Jonathan L. Temte, MD, PhD, AAFP Liaison to ACIP, University 

of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, 

Wisconsin; Ann R. Thomas, MD, Oregon Department of Health, 

Portland, Oregon; Amy E. Warner, MPH, Colorado Department 

of Public Health and Environment, Denver, Colorado; Isaac 

B. Weisfuse, MD, New York Department of Health and Mental 

Hygiene, New York, New York; John B. Wong, MD, FACP, Tufts 

New England Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts. 

References 

1. World Health Organization. Hepatitis B. Geneva, Switzerland: World 

Health Organization; 2000. Available at http://www.who.int/media 

centre/factsheets/fs204/en. 

2. Goldstein ST, Zhou F, Hadler SC, Bell BP, Mast EE, Margolis HS. 

A mathematical model to estimate global hepatitis B disease burden 

and vaccination impact. Int J Epidemiol 2005;34:1329–39. 

3. CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating 

transmission in the United States through universal childhood vacci­

nation: recommendations of the Immunization Practices Advisory 

Committee (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13). 


 

 

 

 

17 

Vol. 57 / RR-8 

Recommendations and Reports 

4. CDC. A comprehensive immunization strategy to eliminate trans­

mission of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: recom­

mendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 

(ACIP). Part 1: immunization of infants, children, and adolescents. 

MMWR 2005;54(No. RR-16). 

5. CDC. A comprehensive immunization strategy to eliminate transmis­

sion of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: recommenda­

tions of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 

Part II: immunization of adults. MMWR 2006;55(No. RR-16). 

6. Vogt T, Wise ME, Shih H, Williams IT. Hepatitis B mortality in the 

United States, 1990–2004 [Abstract]. 45th Annual Meeting of 

Infectious Diseases Society of America, San Diego, California; 

October 4–7, 2007. 

7. CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immu­

nodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-

safety workers: a response to P.L. 100-607 The Health Omnibus 

Programs Extension Act of 1988. MMWR 1989;38(Suppl 6). 

8. CDC. Updated U.S. Public Health Service guidelines for the 

management of occupational exposures to HBV, HCV, and HIV and 

recommendations for postexposure prophylaxis. MMWR 2001;50 

(No. RR-11). 

9. CDC. Guidelines for prevention and control of infections with hepa­

titis viruses in correctional settings. MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-1). 

10. CDC. Treating opportunistic infections among HIV-infected adults 

and adolescents: recommendations from CDC, the National Insti­

tutes of Health, and the HIV Medicine Association/Infectious 

Diseases Society of America. MMWR 2004;53(No. RR-15). 

11. CDC. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2006. 

Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 

2006. 

12. CDC. Surveillance for acute viral hepatitis—United States, 2006. In: 

CDC Surveillance Summaries, March 21, 2008. MMWR 2008;57 

(No. SS-2). 

13. Lok ASF, McMahon BJ. Chronic hepatitis B: AASLD practice guide­

lines. Hepatology 2007;45:507–39. 

14. Mindikoglu AL, Regev A, Schiff ER. Hepatitis B virus reactivation 

after cytotoxic chemotherapy: the disease and its prevention. Clin 

Gastroenterol Hepatol 2006;4:1076–81. 

15. Yeo W, Johnson PJ. Diagnosis, prevention and management of hepa­

titis B virus reactivation during anticancer therapy. Hepatology 

2006;43:209–20. 

16. El Zaatari M, Kazma H, Naboulsi-Majzoub M, et al. Hepatitis B 

virus DNA in serum of ‘anti-HBc only’–positive healthy Lebanese 

blood donors: significance and possible implications. J Hosp Infect 

2007;66:278–82. 

17. Knoll A, Hartmann A, Hamoshi H, Weislmaier K, Jilg W. Serologi­

cal pattern “anti-HBc alone”: characterization of 552 individuals and 

clinical significance. World J Gastroenterol 2006;12:1255–60. 

18. Manzini P, Girotto M, Borsotti R, et al. Italian blood donors with 

anti-HBc and occult hepatitis B virus infection. Haematologica 2007; 

92:1664–70. 

19. O’Brien SF, Fearon MA, Yi QL, et al. Hepatitis B virus DNA-

positive, hepatitis B surface antigen-negative blood donations inter­

cepted by anti-hepatitis B core antigen testing: the Canadian Blood 

Services experience. Transfusion 2007;47:1809–15. 

20. Edmunds WJ, Medley GF, Nokes DJ, Hall AJ, Whittle HC. The 

influence of age on the development of the hepatitis B carrier state. 

Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1993;253:197–201. 

21. McMahon BJ, Alward WL, Hall DB, et al. Acute hepatitis B virus 

infection: relation of age to the clinical expression of disease and subse­

quent development of the carrier state. J Infect Dis 1985;151:599–603. 

22. Hyams KC. Risks of chronicity following acute hepatitis B virus 

infection: a review. Clin Infect Dis 1995;20:992–1000. 

23. Seeff LB, Beebe GW, Hoofnagle JH, et al. A serologic follow-up of 

the 1942 epidemic of post-vaccination hepatitis in the United States 

Army. N Engl J Med 1987;316:965–70. 

24. Lok AS, McMahon BJ. Chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology 2001;34: 

1225–41. 

25. McMahon BJ, Holck P, Bulkow L, Snowball M. Serologic and clini­

cal outcomes of 1536 Alaska Natives chronically infected with hepa­

titis B virus. Ann Intern Med 2001;135:759–68. 

26. Mast EE, Ward JW. Hepatitis B vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, 

Offit PA, eds. Vaccines. 5th edition. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2008. 

27. Weissberg JI, Andres LL, Smith CI, et al. Survival in chronic hepati­

tis B. An analysis of 379 patients. Ann Intern Med 1984;101:613–6. 

28. Guillevin L, Lhote F, Cohen P, et al. Polyarteritis nodosa related to 

hepatitis B virus: a prospective study with long-term observation of 

41patients. Medicine (Baltimore) 1995;74:238–53. 

29. McMahon BJ, Bender TR, Templin DW, et al. Vasculitis in Eskimos living 

in an area hyperendemic for hepatitis B. JAMA 1980;244:2180–2. 

30. Willson RA. Extrahepatic manifestations of chronic viral hepatitis. 

Am J Gastroenterol 1997;92:3–17. 

31. Hoofnagle JH, Di Bisceglie AM. Serologic diagnosis of acute and 

chronic viral hepatitis. Semin Liver Dis 1991;11:73–83. 

32. Hoofnagle JH, Doo E, Liang TJ, Fleischer R, Lok AS. Management 

of hepatitis B: summary of a clinical research workshop. Hepatology 

2007;45:1056–75. 

33. Krugman S, Overby LR, Mushahwar IK, Ling CM, Frosner GG, 

Deinhardt F. Viral hepatitis, type B. Studies on natural history and 

prevention re-examined. N Engl J Med 1979;300:101–6. 

34. Biswas R, Tabor E, Hsia CC, et al. Comparative sensitivity of HBV 

NATs and HBsAg assays for detection of acute HBV infection. Trans­

fusion 2003;43:788–98. 

35. Kloster B, Kramer R, Eastlund T, Grossman B, Zarvan B. Hepatitis 

B surface antigenemia in blood donors following vaccination. Trans­

fusion 1995;35:475–7. 

36. Lunn ER, Hoggarth BJ, Cook WJ. Prolonged hepatitis B surface 

antigenemia after vaccination. Pediatrics 2000;105:E81. 

37. Kao JH, Chen PJ, Lai MY, Chen DS. Acute exacerbations of chronic 

hepatitis B are rarely associated with superinfection of hepatitis B 

virus. Hepatology 2001;34:817–23. 

38. Alward WL, McMahon BJ, Hall DB, Heyward WL, Francis DP, 

Bender TR. The long-term serological course of asymptomatic hepa­

titis B virus carriers and the development of primary hepatocellular 

carcinoma. J Infect Dis 1985;151:604–9. 

39. Liaw YF, Sheen IS, Chen TJ, Chu CM, Pao CC. Incidence, determi­

nants and significance of delayed clearance of serum HBsAg in chronic 

hepatitis B virus infection: a prospective study. Hepatology 1991;13: 

627–31. 

40. Grob P, Jilg W, Bornhak H, et al. Serological pattern “anti-HBc alone”: 

report on a workshop. J Med Virol 2000;62:450–5. 

41. Silva AE, McMahon BJ, Parkinson AJ, Sjogren MH, Hoofnagle JH, 

Di Bisceglie AM. Hepatitis B virus DNA in persons with isolated 

antibody to hepatitis B core antigen who subsequently received hepa­

titis B vaccine. Clin Infect Dis 1998;26:895–7. 


 

 

 

 

 

18 

MMWR 

September 19, 2008 

42. McMahon BJ, Parkinson AJ, Helminiak C, et al. Response to hepati­

tis B vaccine of persons positive for antibody to hepatitis B core anti­

gen. Gastroenterology 1992;103:590–4. 

43. Lai CL, Lau JY, Yeoh EK, Chang WK, Lin HJ. Significance of 

isolated anti-HBc seropositivity by ELISA: implications and the role 

of radioimmunoassay. J Med Virol 1992;36:180–3. 

44. De Feo TM, Poli F, Mozzi F, Moretti MP, Scalamogna M. Risk of trans­

mission of hepatitis B virus from anti-HBC positive cadaveric organ 

donors: a collaborative study. Transplant Proc 2005;37:1238–9. 

45. Alter HJ, Seeff LB, Kaplan PM, et al. Type B hepatitis: the infectivity 

of blood positive for e antigen and DNA polymerase after accidental 

needlestick exposure. N Engl J Med 1976;295:909–13. 

46. Shikata T, Karasawa T, Abe K, et al. Hepatitis B e antigen and 

infectivity of hepatitis B virus. J Infect Dis 1977;136:571–6. 

47. Yim HJ, Lok AS. Natural history of chronic hepatitis B virus infec­

tion: what we knew in 1981 and what we know in 2005. Hepatology 

2006;43:S173–81. 

48. Brunetto MR, Stemler M, Schodel F, et al. Identification of HBV 

variants which cannot produce precore derived HBeAg and may be 

responsible for severe hepatitis. Ital J Gastroenterol 1989;21:154. 

49. Carman WF, Jacyna MR, Hadziyannis S, et al. Mutation preventing 

formation of hepatitis B e antigen in patients with chronic hepatitis 

B infection. Lancet 1989;2:588–91. 

50. Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS. Viral hepatitis B: aspects of 

environmental control. Health Laboratory Science 1977;14:235–52. 

51. Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard 

JE. Survival of hepatitis B virus after drying and storage for one week. 

Lancet 1981;1:550–1. 

52. Davis LG, Weber DJ, Lemon SM. Horizontal transmission of 

hepatitis B virus. Lancet 1989;1:889–93. 

53. Gunson RN, Shouval D, Roggendorf M, et al. Hepatitis B virus HBV 

and hepatitis C virus HCV infections in health care workers (HCWs): 

guidelines for prevention of transmission of HBV and HCV from 

HCW to patients. J Clin Virol 2003;27:213–30. 

54. CDC. Disease burden from hepatitis A, B, and C in the United States. 

Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 

2008. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/hepatitis/ 

resource/PDFs/disease_burden.pdf. 

55. CDC. Acute hepatitis B among children and adolescents—United 

States, 1990–2002. MMWR 2004;53:1015–8. 

56. Konopnicki D, Mocroft A, de Wit S, et al. Hepatitis B and HIV: 

prevalence, AIDS progression, response to highly active antiretroviral 

therapy and increased mortality in the EuroSIDA cohort. AIDS 2005; 

19:593–601. 

57. Sulkowski MS. Management of hepatic complications in HIV-

infected persons. J Infect Dis;2008:S279–93. 

58. Alter MJ. Epidemiology of viral hepatitis and HIV co-infection. 

J Hepatol 2006;44:S6–9. 

59. U.S. Census Bureau. B05006. Place of birth for the foreign-born 

population - universe: foreign-born population excluding population 

born at sea. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau; 2006. Available 

at http://factfinder.census.gov/home/saff/main.html?_lang=en&amp;_ts=. 

60. Madani TA. Trend in incidence of hepatitis B virus infection during 

a decade of universal childhood hepatitis B vaccination in Saudi 

Arabia. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2007;101:278–83. 

61. Blaine HF, Bell B, Levy-Bruhl D, Shouval D, Wiersma S, Van Damme 

P. Hepatitis A and B vaccination and public health. J Viral Hepat 

2007;14(Suppl 1):1–5. 

62. Shepard CW, Simard EP, Finelli L, Fiore AE, Bell BP. Hepatitis B 

virus infection: epidemiology and vaccination. Epidemiol Rev 

2006;28:112–25. 

63. Tsebe KV, Burnett RJ, Hlungwani NP, Sibara MM, Venter PA, 

Mphahlele MJ. The first five years of universal hepatitis B vaccina­

tion in South Africa: evidence for elimination of HBsAg carriage in 

under 5-year-olds. Vaccine 2001;19:3919–26. 

64. Wasley A, Kruszon-Moran D, Kuhnert W, et al. Hepatitis B preva­

lence in the U.S. in era of vaccination [Abstract 723]. 45th Annual 

Meeting of the Infectious Diseases Society of America, San Diego, 

California; October 4–7, 2007. 

65. Perz JF, Openo K, Ahmed F, Bell BP. Trends in mortality from liver 

cancer in the United States, 1993–2002. J Clin Virol 2006;36(Suppl 2): 

S176. 

66. Chang ET, Keegan TH, Gomez SL, The burden of liver cancer in 

Asians and Pacific Islanders in the Greater San Francisco Bay Area, 

1990 through 2004. Cancer 2007;109:2100–8. 

67. Hainaut P, Boyle P. Curbing the liver cancer epidemic in Africa. 

Lancet 2008;371:367–8. 

68. Tandon BN, Acharya SK, Tandon A. Epidemiology of hepatitis B 

virus infection in India. Gut 1996;38(Suppl 2):S56–9. 

69. CDC. Recommendation of the Immunization Practices Advisory 

Committee (ACIP). Inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine. MMWR 

1982;31:317–22, 27–8. 

70. Hurie MB, Mast EE, Davis JP. Horizontal transmission of hepatitis 

B virus infection to United States-born children of Hmong refugees. 

Pediatrics 1992;89:269–73. 

71. Mahoney FJ, Lawrence M, Scott C, Le Q, Lambert S, Farley TA. 

Continuing risk for hepatitis B virus transmission among Southeast 

Asian infants in Louisiana. Pediatrics 1995;96:1113–6. 

72. Franks AL, Berg CJ, Kane MA, et al. Hepatitis B infection among 

children born in the United States to southeast Asian refugees. 

N Engl J Med 1989;321:1305. 

73. Bower WA, Finelli L, Goldstein ST. Hepadnaviridae: hepatitis B and 

hepatitis D virus. In: Long S, Pickering L, Prober CG, eds. Principles 

and practice of pediatric infectious diseases. 3rd ed. New York, NY: 

Churchill Livingston; 2007:1086–97. 

74. Heathcote J, Gateau P, Sherlock S. Role of hepatitis-B antigen carri­

ers in non-parenteral transmission of the hepatitis-B virus. Lancet 

1974;2:370–1. 

75. Bernier RH, Sampliner R, Gerety R, Tabor E, Hamilton F, Nathanson 

N. Hepatitis B infection in households of chronic carriers of hepati­

tis B surface antigen: factors associated with prevalence of infection. 

Am J Epidemiol 1982;116:199–211. 

76. Irwin GR, Allen AM, Bancroft WH, Karwacki JJ, Pinkerton RH, 

Russell PK. Hepatitis B antigen and antibody. Occurrence in families 

of asymptomatic HB AG carriers. JAMA 1974;227:1042–3. 

77. Chakravarty R, Chowdhury A, Chaudhuri S, et al. Hepatitis B infec­

tion in Eastern Indian families: need for screening of adult siblings 

and mothers of adult index cases. Public Health 2005;119:647–54. 

78. Seage GR III, Mayer KH, Lenderking WR, et al. HIV and hepatitis 

B infection and risk behavior in young gay and bisexual men. Public 

Health Rep 1997;112:158–67. 

79. MacKellar DA, Valleroy LA, Secura GM, et al. Two decades after 

vaccine license: hepatitis B immunization and infection among young 

men who have sex with men. Am J Public Health 2001;91:965–71. 


 

 

 

 

 

19 

Vol. 57 / RR-8 

Recommendations and Reports 

80. Weinbaum CM, Lyerla R, MacKellar DA, et al. The Young Men’s 

Survey Phase II: hepatitis B immunization and infection among young 

men who have sex with men. Am J Public Health 2008;98:839–45. 

81. Dietzman DE, Harnisch JP, Ray CG, Alexander ER, Holmes KK. Hepa­

titis B surface antigen HBsAg and antibody to HBsAg. Prevalence in 

homosexual and heterosexual men. JAMA 1977;238:2625–6. 

82. Schreeder MT, Thompson SE, Hadler SC, et al. Hepatitis B in 

homosexual men: prevalence of infection and factors related to 

transmission. J Infect Dis 1982;146:7–15. 

83. Szmuness W, Much I, Prince AM, et al. On the role of sexual behav­

ior in the spread of hepatitis B infection. Ann Intern Med 1975; 

83:489–95. 

84. Lopez-Zetina J, Kerndt P, Ford W, Woerhle T, Weber M. Prevalence 

of HIV and hepatitis B and self-reported injection risk behavior 

during detention among street-recruited injection drug users in Los 

Angeles County, 1994–1996. Addiction 2001;96:589–95. 

85. Kunches LM, Craven DE, Werner BG. Seroprevalence of hepatitis B 

virus and delta agent in parenteral drug abusers. Immunogenicity of 

hepatitis B vaccine. Am J Med 1986;81:591–5. 

86. Raimondo G, Smedile A, Gallo L, Balbo A, Ponzetto A, Rizzetto M. 

Multicentre study of prevalence of HBV-associated delta infection 

and liver disease in drug-addicts. Lancet 1982;1:249–51. 

87. Zeldis JB, Jain S, Kuramoto IK, et al. Seroepidemiology of viral 

infections among intravenous drug users in northern California. West 

J Med 1992;156:30–5. 

88. Mangla JC, Kim YM, Brown MR, Schwob D, Hanson SE. Liver tests, 

HB-Ag and HB-Ab in asymptomatic drug addicts. Am J Gastroenterol 

1976;65:121–6. 

89. Seeff LB, Zimmerman HJ, Wright EC, et al. Hepatic disease in 

asymptomatic parenteral narcotic drug abusers: a Veterans Adminis­

tration collaborative study. Am J Med Sci 1975;270:41–7. 

90. Cherubin CE, Schaefer RA, Rosenthal WS, et al. The natural history 

of liver disease in former drug users. Am J Med Sci 1976;272:244–53. 

91. Blanck RR, Ream N, Conrad M. Hepatitis B antigen and antibody 

in heroin users. Am J Gastroenterol 1979;71:164–7. 

92. Kellerman SE, Hanson DL, McNaghten AD, Fleming PL. Prevalence 

of chronic hepatitis B and incidence of acute hepatitis B infection in 

human immunodeficiency virus-infected subjects. J Infect Dis 

2003;188:571–7. 

93. Fleming DT, Zambrowski A, Fong F, et al. Surveillance programs for 

chronic viral hepatitis in three health departments. Public Health Rep 

2006;121:23–35. 

94. Bialek SR, Bower WA, Mottram K, et al. Risk factors for hepatitis B 

in an outbreak of hepatitis B and D among injection drug users. 

J Urban Health 2005;82:468–78. 

95. Hagan H, McGough JP, Thiede H, Weiss NS, Hopkins S, Alexander 

ER. Syringe exchange and risk of infection with hepatitis B and C 

viruses. Am J Epidemiol 1999;149:203–13. 

96. Thio CL, Seaberg EC, Skolasky R Jr, et al. HIV-1, hepatitis B virus, 

and risk of liver-related mortality in the Multicenter Cohort Study 

(MACS). Lancet 2002;360:1921–6. 

97. McGovern BH. The epidemiology, natural history and prevention of 

hepatitis B: implications of HIV coinfection. Antivir Ther 2007;12 

(Suppl 3):H3–13. 

98. Santiago-Munoz P, Roberts S, Sheffield J, McElwee B, Wendel GD 

Jr. Prevalence of hepatitis B and C in pregnant women who are 

infected with human immunodeficiency virus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 

2005;193:1270–3. 

99. Bonacini M, Louie S, Bzowej N, Wohl AR. Survival in patients with 

HIV infection and viral hepatitis B or C: a cohort study. AIDS 2004; 

18:2039–45. 

100. Hadler SC, Judson FN, O’Malley PM, et al. Outcome of hepatitis B 

virus infection in homosexual men and its relation to prior human 

immunodeficiency virus infection. J Infect Dis 1991;163:454–9. 

101. Loomba R, Rowley A, Wesley R, et al. Systematic review: the effect of 

preventive lamivudine on hepatitis B reactivation during chemo­

therapy. Ann Intern Med 2008;148:519–28. 

102. Saab S, Dong MH, Joseph TA, Tong MJ. Hepatitis B prophylaxis in 

patients undergoing chemotherapy for lymphoma: a decision analy­

sis model. Hepatology 2007;46:1049–56. 

103. CDC. Screening for chronic hepatitis B among Asian/Pacific Islander 

populations—New York City, 2005. MMWR 2006;55:505–9. 

104. Choe JH, Taylor VM, Yasui Y, et al. Health care access and 

sociodemographic factors associated with hepatitis B testing in Viet­

namese American men. J Immigr Minor Health 2006;8:193–201. 

105. Taylor VM, Jackson JC, Chan N, Kuniyuki A, Yasui Y. Hepatitis B 

knowledge and practices among Cambodian American women in 

Seattle, Washington. J Community Health 2002;27:151–63. 

106. Liaw YF, Leung N, Guan R, et al. Asian-Pacific consensus statement 

on the management of chronic hepatitis B: a 2008 update. Hepatol 

Int 2008. Available at http://www.springerlink.com/content/du475u 

12q655175j/fulltext.html. 

107. The EASL Jury. EASL International Consensus Conference on 

Hepatitis B. 13–14 September, 2002: Geneva, Switzerland. Consen­

sus statement short version. J Hepatol 2003;38:533–40. 

108. Bruix J, Sherman M. Management of hepatocellular carcinoma. 

Hepatology 2005;42:1208–36. 

109. CDC. Prevention of hepatitis A through active or passive immuniza­

tion. Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immuniza­

tion Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2006;55(No. RR-7). 

110. Ohnishi K, Iida S, Iwama S, et al. The effect of chronic habitual alco­

hol intake on the development of liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular 

carcinoma: relation to hepatitis B surface antigen carriage. Cancer 

1982;49:672–7. 

111. Ikeda K, Saitoh S, Suzuki Y, et al. Disease progression and hepatocel­

lular carcinogenesis in patients with chronic viral hepatitis: a pro­

spective observation of 2215patients. J Hepatol 1998;28:930–8. 

112. CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of infections 

among chronic hemodialysis patients. MMWR 2001;50(No. RR-5). 

113. Code of Federal Regulations. Title 21. Food and Drugs. Section 

610.40. 2007. 

114. Wilson JM, Jungner G. Principles and practice of screening for 

disease. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 1968. 

115. Paltiel AD, Weinstein MC, Kimmel AD, et al. Expanded screening 

for HIV in the United States—an analysis of cost-effectiveness. 

N Engl J Med 2005;352:586–95. 

116. O’Connor PJ, Rush WA, Cherney LM, Pronk NP. Screening for dia­

betes mellitus in high-risk patients: cost, yield, and acceptability. Eff 

Clin Pract 2001;4:271–7. 

117. Keren R, Helfand M, Homer C, McPhillips H, Lieu TA. Projected 

cost-effectiveness of statewide universal newborn hearing screening. 

Pediatrics 2002;110:855–64. 

118. Feuchtbaum L, Cunningham G. Economic evaluation of tandem mass 

spectrometry screening in California. Pediatrics 2006;117:S280–6. 


 

 

20 

MMWR 

September 19, 2008 

119. Turner ML, Bessos H, Fagge T, et al. Prospective epidemiologic study 

of the outcome and cost-effectiveness of antenatal screening to detect 

neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia due to anti-HPA-1a. Trans­

fusion 2005;45:1945–56. 

120. Ball RH, Caughey AB, Malone FD, et al. First- and second-trimester 

evaluation of risk for Down syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 2007;110:10–7. 

121. CDC. Protection against viral hepatitis: recommendations of the 

Immunization Practices Advisory Committee (ACIP). MMWR 

1990;39(No. RR-2). 

122. Aberg JA, Gallant JE, Anderson J, et al. Primary care guidelines for the 

management of persons infected with human immunodeficiency 

virus: recommendations of the HIV Medicine Association of the 

Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2004;39:609–29. 

123. American Academy of Pediatrics. Medical evaluation of internation­

ally adopted children for infectious diseases. In: Pickering LK, ed. 

Red book: 2006 report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases. 27th 

edition. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 

2006:182–91. 

124. CDC. Chronic hepatitis B virus 2007 case definition. Atlanta, GA: 

US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2007. Avail­

able at http://www.cdc.gov/ncphi/disss/nndss/casedef/hepatitisb 

current.htm. 

125. Weinberg MS, Gunn RA, Mast EE, Gresham L, Ginsberg M. Pre­

venting transmission of hepatitis B virus from people with chronic 

infection. Am J Prev Med 2001;20:272–6. 

126. CDC. Guidelines for environmental infection control in health-care 

facilities: recommendations of CDC and the Healthcare Infection 

Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 2003; 

52(No. RR-10). 

127. Shapiro CN, McCaig LF, Gensheimer KF, et al. Hepatitis B virus 

transmission between children in day care. Pediatr Infect Dis J 

1989;8:870–5. 

128. CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human 

immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during 

exposure-prone invasive procedures. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8). 

129. CDC. Health information for international travel 2008. Atlanta, GA: 

US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2008. Avail­

able at http://wwwn.cdc.gov/travel/yellowBookCh4-Schistosomiasis.aspx. 

130. Berhe N, Myrvang B, Gundersen SG. Intensity of Schistosoma mansoni, 

hepatitis B, age, and sex predict levels of hepatic periportal thicken­

ing/fibrosis PPT/F: a large-scale community-based study in Ethio­

pia. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2007;77:1079–86. 

131. Badawi AF, Michael MS. Risk factors for hepatocellular carcinoma in 

Egypt: the role of hepatitis-B viral infection and schistosomiasis. 

Anticancer Res 1999;19:4565–9. 

132. The ECC Jury. Short statement of the first European Consensus 

Conference on the treatment of chronic hepatitis B and C in HIV 

co-infected patients. J Hepatol 2005;42:615–24. 

133. Gilead Pharmaceuticals. FDA-approved patient labeling. VIREAD® 

(VEER ee ad) tablets 2008. Available at http://www.viread.com/pdf/ 

viread_PI.pdf. 

134. Keeffe EB, Dieterich DT, Han SH, et al. A treatment algorithm for 

the management of chronic hepatitis B virus infection in the United 

States: an update. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2006;4:936–62. 

135. US Department of Health and Human Services. Guidelines for use 

of antiretroviral agents in HIV-1-infected adults and adolescents. Rockville, 

MD: US Department of Health and Human Services; 2006. Available 

at http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/ContentFiles/AdultandAdolescentGL.pdf. 

136. Lai CL, Gane E, Liaw YF, et al. Telbivudine versus lamivudine in 

patients with chronic hepatitis B. N Engl J Med 2007;357:2576–88. 

137. Burt MR, Aron LY, Douglas T, Valente J, Edgar Lee E, Iwen B. 

Homelessness: programs and the people they serve—findings of the 

National Survey of Homeless Assistance Providers and Clients. Wash­

ington, DC, Interagency Council on the Homeless; 1999. Available 

at http://www.huduser.org/publications/homeless/homelessness. 

138. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. The 

DASIS report: treatment admissions for injection drug use, 2003. 

Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 

Administration; 2005. 

139. CDC. Trends in injection drug use among persons entering addic­

tion treatment—New Jersey, 1992–1999. MMWR 2001;50:378–81. 

140. Office of National Drug Control Policy. Drug data summary: March 

2003. Washington, DC, Office of National Drug Control Policy; 2003. 

Available at http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/publications/ 

factsht/drugdata/index.html. 

141. CDC. Hepatitis B vaccination among high-risk adolescents and adults— 

San Diego, California, 1998–2001. MMWR 2002;51:618–21. 

142. CDC. Medical examination of aliens: technical instructions, infor­

mation, and updates. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and 

Human Services, CDC; 2007. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/ 

dq/technica.htm. 

143. CDC. Perinatal hepatitis B coordinator resource center. Atlanta, 

GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2008. 

Available at www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/Partners/PeriHepBCoord.htm. 

144. Schrag SJ, Fiore AE, Gonik B, et al. Vaccination and perinatal infec­

tion prevention practices among obstetrician-gynecologists. Obstet 

Gynecol 2003;101:704–10. 

145. Wan KJ, Miyoshi T, Fryer G, et al. Screening for hepatitis B virus 

HBV infection by primary care physicians in New York City: are 

screening recommendations for persons born in endemic countries 

being followed? Hepatology 2007;46(Suppl 1):889. 



 



The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free of charge 

in electronic format. To receive an electronic copy each week, send an e-mail message to listserv@listserv.cdc.gov. The body content should read SUBscribe mmwr­

toc. Electronic copy also is available from CDC’s Internet server at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr or from CDC’s file transfer protocol server at ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/ 

publications/mmwr. Paper copy subscriptions are available through the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 

20402; telephone 202-512-1800. 

Data in the weekly MMWR are provisional, based on weekly reports to CDC by state health departments. The reporting week concludes at close of business on 

Friday; compiled data on a national basis are officially released to the public on the following Friday. Data are compiled in the National Center for Public Health 

Informatics, Division of Integrated Surveillance Systems and Services. Address all inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for 

publication, to Editor, MMWR Series, Mailstop E-90, CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30333 or to mmwrq@cdc.gov. 

All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated. 

Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations or 

their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses listed in 

MMWR were current as of the date of publication. 

✩U.S. Government Printing Office: 2008-723-026/41115 Region IV ISSN: 1057-5987 

