Systemic Therapy for Advanced Hepatocellular

Carcinoma: ASCO Guideline

abstract

PURPOSE To develop an evidence-based clinical practice guideline to assist in clinical decision making for

patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

METHODS ASCO convened an Expert Panel to conduct a systematic review of published phase III randomized

controlled trials (2007-2020) on systemic therapy for advanced HCC and provide recommended care options for

this patient population.

RESULTS Nine phase III randomized controlled trials met the inclusion criteria.

RECOMMENDATIONS Atezolizumab 1 bevacizumab (atezo 1 bev) may be offered as ﬁrst-line treatment of most

patients with advanced HCC, Child-Pugh class A liver disease, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Perfor-

mance Status (ECOG PS) 0-1, and following management of esophageal varices, when present, according to

institutional guidelines. Where there are contraindications to atezolizumab and/or bevacizumab, tyrosine kinase

inhibitors sorafenib or lenvatinib may be offered as ﬁrst-line treatment of patients with advanced HCC, Child-

Pugh class A liver disease, and ECOG PS 0-1. Following ﬁrst-line treatment with atezo 1 bev, and until better

data are available, second-line therapy with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor may be recommended for appropriate

candidates. Following ﬁrst-line therapy with sorafenib or lenvatinib, second-line therapy options for appropriate

candidates include cabozantinib, regorafenib for patients who previously tolerated sorafenib, or ramucirumab

(for patients with a-fetoprotein $ 400 ng/mL), or atezo 1 bev where patients did not have access to this option as

ﬁrst-line therapy. Pembrolizumab or nivolumab are also reasonable options for appropriate patients following

sorafenib or lenvatinib. Consideration of nivolumab 1 ipilimumab as an option for second-line therapy and third-

line therapy is discussed. Further guidance on choosing between therapy options is included within the

guideline. Additional information is available at www.asco.org/gastrointestinal-cancer-guidelines.

INTRODUCTION

There were approximately 670,000 new cases and

625,000 deaths worldwide due to hepatocellular

carcinoma (HCC) in 2018. HCC comprises 75%-

85% of primary liver cancer cases and is the fourth-

leading cause of annual cancer deaths worldwide.1 In

the United States, it is estimated that liver cancer will

account for approximately 42,810 new cases and

approximately 30,160 deaths in 2020.2 Risk factors

vary by geographic region and include chronic viral

hepatitis (hepatitis B virus [HBV] infection, hepati-

tis C virus [HCV] infection); alcohol-related liver

disease; environmental exposures, speciﬁcally aﬂatoxin-

contaminated foods; and morbid obesity and diabetes.3

Three-quarters of cases occur in the Asia-Paciﬁc region,

where the main risk factor outside of Japan is HBV.1

HCC is two to three times as common in men as in

women.4 Incidence of HCC is currently on the rise in the

United States,5 related in part to a rise in the incidence

of obesity and type II diabetes over the past several

decades.6 Decreases in incidence rates among Asian

and Paciﬁc Islanders and younger cohorts may con-

tribute to an overall reduction in cases of HCC in future

years.7

Effective treatment options, such as resection, liver

transplantation, and ablation, exist for early-stage

HCC, and patients with locally advanced disease

may be candidates for liver-directed therapies,

including transarterial chemoembolization (TACE),

bland embolization, and radioembolization. Historically,

HCC was diagnosed at an advanced, incurable stage and

had a poor prognosis due to the palliative nature of available

systemic and local therapies.8 Trials of systemic therapy for

advanced HCC failed to show improved outcomes until the

advent of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) sorafenib,9 fol-

lowed by randomized controlled trials (RCTs) published in

2008 and 2009 demonstrating a survival beneﬁt with sor-

afenib versus placebo.9,10 Following the availability of sor-

afenib, no further effective systemic therapy options were

identiﬁed for almost a decade. In recent years, however,

several newer systemic therapy options have shown efﬁcacy

in the ﬁrst- and second-line settings. Most recently, evidence

of the effectiveness of combination therapy has also been

reported.11-13 This guideline incorporates the evidence for

systemic therapy options for patients with advanced HCC to

provide recommendations to clinicians who are treating

patients within the target population.

GUIDELINE QUESTIONS

This clinical practice guideline addresses the follow-

ing clinical question: What are the preferred sys-

temic treatment options for ﬁrst-line and subsequent

systemic therapy for patients with advanced hepatocellular

carcinoma?

METHODS

Guideline Development Process

This systematic review-based guideline was developed by

a multidisciplinary Expert Panel, which included a patient

representative and an ASCO guidelines staff member with

health research methodology expertise. The Expert Panel

met via teleconference and/or webinar and corresponded

through e-mail (Appendix Table A1, online only). Based

upon the consideration of the evidence, the authors were

asked to contribute to the development of the guideline,

provide critical review, and ﬁnalize the guideline recom-

mendations. The guideline recommendations were sent for

an open comment period of 2 weeks, allowing the public to

review and comment on the recommendations after sub-

mitting a conﬁdentiality agreement. These comments were

taken into consideration while ﬁnalizing the recommen-

dations. Members of the Expert Panel were responsible for

reviewing and approving the penultimate version of the

guideline, which was then circulated for external review and

submitted to Journal of Clinical Oncology for editorial review

and consideration for publication. All ASCO guidelines are

ultimately reviewed and approved by the Expert Panel and

the ASCO Clinical Practice Guidelines Committee prior to

publication. All funding for the administration of the project

was provided by ASCO.

A systematic search was conducted of PubMed for phase

III RCTs published between January 1, 2007 and May 15,

2020. Articles were selected for inclusion in the sys-

tematic review of the evidence based on the following

criteria:

• Population: Patients with unresectable advanced he-

patocellular carcinoma, including patients who are no

longer candidates for surgical or liver-directed thera-

pies (ie, patients with characteristics such as multifocal

and/or inﬁltrative disease within the liver, vascular

invasion, or extrahepatic spread).

• Intervention: First-line or greater-line (due to pro-

gression or toxicity) systemic therapy with TKIs,

including sorafenib, regorafenib, lenvatinib, and

cabozantinib; immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), in-

cluding atezolizumab, nivolumab, pembrolizumab,

and ipilimumab; and/or antiangiogenic agents, in-

cluding bevacizumab and ramucirumab (in patients

with a-fetoprotein [AFP] $ 400 ng/mL), including

combinations of selected agents.

• Comparison: Interventions listed or placebo control.

• Outcomes: Overall survival (OS), progression-free

survival (PFS), time to progression, objective response

rate (ORR), rate of drug discontinuation, adverse

events, quality of life.

Articles were excluded from the systematic review if they

were (1) meeting abstracts not subsequently published in

peer-reviewed journals within a 2-year time frame; (2)

editorials, commentaries, letters, news articles, case re-

ports, narrative reviews; or (3) published in a non-English

language, given the conﬁned medical language expertise of

the panel members. The guideline recommendation lan-

guage is crafted, in part, using the Guidelines Into Deci-

sion Support (GLIDES) methodology and accompanying

BRIDGE-Wiz software.20 In addition, a guideline imple-

mentability review was conducted. Based on the imple-

mentability review, revisions were made to the draft to

clarify recommended actions for clinical practice. Ratings

for the type and strength of recommendation and evidence

quality are provided with each recommendation. Certainty

of the evidence (ie, evidence quality) for each outcome was

assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool and ele-

ments of the Grading of Recommendations Assessment,

Development and Evaluation (GRADE) quality assessment

and recommendations development process.21 To facilitate

the quality assessment ratings, MAGICApp guideline de-

velopment software was used; within this framework,

outcomes from RCTs are rated high quality and can sub-

sequently be downgraded as factors that affect quality (ie,

certainty) are identiﬁed.22 GRADE quality assessment la-

bels (ie, high, moderate, low, very low) were assigned for

each outcome by the project methodologist in collaboration

with the Expert Panel co-chairs and reviewed by the full

Expert Panel. Relative risk values were calculated using

Review Manager 5.3.

The ASCO Expert Panel and guidelines staff will work with

the co-chairs to monitor emerging literature requiring up-

dates to the guidelines. The ASCO Guidelines Methodology

Manual (available at www.asco.org/guideline-methodology)

provides additional information about the guideline update

process. This is the most recent information as of the

publication date.

Guideline Disclaimer

The Clinical Practice Guidelines and other guidance

published herein are provided by the American Society of

Clinical Oncology, Inc. (ASCO) to assist providers in clinical

decision making. The information herein should not be

relied upon as being complete or accurate, nor should it be

considered as inclusive of all proper treatments or methods

of care or as a statement of the standard of care. With the

rapid development of scientiﬁc knowledge, new evidence

may emerge between the time information is developed

and when it is published or read. The information is not

continually updated and may not reﬂect the most recent

evidence. The information addresses only the topics spe-

ciﬁcally identiﬁed therein and is not applicable to other

interventions, diseases, or stages of diseases. This in-

formation does not mandate any particular course of

medical care. Further, the information is not intended to

substitute for the independent professional judgment of the

treating provider, as the information does not account for

individual variation among patients. Recommendations

reﬂect high, moderate, or low conﬁdence that the rec-

ommendation reﬂects the net effect of a given course of

action. The use of words like “must,” “must not,” “should,”

and “should not” indicates that a course of action is rec-

ommended or not recommended for either most or many

patients, but there is latitude for the treating physician to

select other courses of action in individual cases. In all

cases, the selected course of action should be considered

by the treating provider in the context of treating the in-

dividual patient. Use of the information is voluntary. ASCO

provides this information on an “as is” basis and makes no

warranty, express or implied, regarding the information.

ASCO speciﬁcally disclaims any warranties of merchant-

ability or ﬁtness for a particular use or purpose. ASCO

assumes no responsibility for any injury or damage to

persons or property arising out of or related to any use of this

information, or for any errors or omissions.

Guideline and Conﬂicts of Interest

The Expert Panel was assembled in accordance with

ASCO’s Conﬂict of Interest Policy Implementation for

Clinical Practice Guidelines (“Policy,” found at http://

www.asco.org/rwc). All members of the Expert Panel

completed ASCO’s disclosure form, which requires dis-

closure of ﬁnancial and other interests, including re-

lationships with commercial entities that are reasonably

likely to experience direct regulatory or commercial impact

as a result of promulgation of the guideline. Categories for

disclosure include employment; leadership; stock or other

ownership; honoraria, consulting or advisory role; speaker’s

bureau; research funding; patents, royalties, other in-

tellectual property; expert testimony; travel, accommoda-

tions, expenses; and other relationships. In accordance

with the Policy, the majority of the members of the Expert

Panel did not disclose any relationships constituting

a conﬂict under the Policy.

RESULTS

Nine phase III RCTs met the inclusion criteria, of which

eight were fully published10,12,18,23-27 and one was pre-

sented as an abstract.28

First-Line Therapy, Full Text Articles

Four of the identiﬁed trials assessed systemic therapy

options in the ﬁrst-line setting, including two trials of sor-

afenib compared with placebo, one trial of lenvatinib

compared with sorafenib, and one trial of atezolizumab-

bevacizumab (atezo 1 bev) compared with sorafenib.

Across these four studies, patients were predominantly

male ($ 84%). Underlying causes of liver disease included

HBV, HCV, alcohol, and other or unknown. Most patients

had advanced (Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer [BCLC] stage

C; range, 78%-96% across experimental and control

groups) or intermediate stage HCC (BCLC stage B; range,

15%-22%). Macrovascular invasion and/or extrahepatic

spread was present in 69%-79% across study groups.

Virtually all patients had Child-Pugh class A liver disease ($

95% of patients), indicating better prognosis, and Eastern

Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG

PS) 0-1 (good functional status). Additional descriptions for

each study are included below, and additional patient

characteristics, including reported AFP levels, involved

disease sites, and previous treatment are included in

Table 1.

Sorafenib Versus Placebo

The study by Llovet et al (SHARP)25 included 602 patients

with advanced HCC who were not eligible for or who had

disease progression after local therapies. Patients were from

centers mostly located in Europe and Australasia (88%). The

most common liver disease etiologies across the study

population were HCV (28%), HBV (19%), or alcohol (26%).

The trial was stopped early after an interim analysis detected

a signiﬁcant OS advantage for sorafenib. The smaller study

by Cheng et al (Asia-Paciﬁc)10 (N 5 271) was subsequently

performed to conﬁrm the former study’s results in an Asian

population (China, South Korea, Taiwan); the cause of liver

disease in this study was HBV in the majority of patients

(71% of sorafenib-treated patients and 78% of placebo-

treated patients; Tables 2 and 3). These patients were also

more likely to have extrahepatic spread and/or macro-

vascular invasion compared with Llovet et al25 (79% v 70%,

respectively), and their median age was 52 years, compared

with median age of 65 years in the SHARP trial.

Both studies reported signiﬁcantly better OS with sorafenib,

compared with placebo, with similar hazard ratios for Llovet

et al25 and Cheng et al10: 0.69 (95% CI, 0.55 to 0.87) and

0.68 (95% CI, 0.50 to 0.93), respectively. Both studies also

reported a signiﬁcant beneﬁt for sorafenib over placebo in

time to progression measured by RECIST and stable dis-

ease, but no difference in symptomatic time to progression,

which was the coprimary endpoint along with OS in the trial

by Llovet et al.25 Median survival time in both experimental

and control groups was lower in the Asia-Paciﬁc trial, po-

tentially due to patient characteristics (Table 1). Adverse

events were similar across trials, with patients treated with

sorafenib more likely to report hand-foot skin reaction

(HFSR), diarrhea, alopecia, fatigue, rash or desquamation,

hypertension, and anorexia (Table 4).

Lenvatinib Versus Sorafenib

In 2018, Kudo et al (REFLECT)18 published the results of

a multisite global 954-patient RCT of sorafenib versus

lenvatinib. Patients were from the Western region (33%; ie,

Europe, North America, Israel, and Russia) or Asia-Paciﬁc

region (67%; ie, China, Hong Kong, Japan, South Korea,

Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, and Thailand).

The underlying cause of HCC (lenvatinib v sorafenib, re-

spectively) was HBV (53% v 48%) or HCV (19% v 26%),

with a minority attributable to alcohol (8% v 4%). Greater

than 50% liver involvement and main portal vein invasion

were exclusion criteria for this trial. Additional patient

characteristics are included in Table 1.

There was no signiﬁcant difference in OS between groups

(hazard ratio [HR], 0.92; 95% CI, 0.79 to 1.06), indicating

the noninferiority of lenvatinib compared with sorafenib.

PFS (HR, 0.64; 95% CI, 0.55 to 0.76) and ORRs (HR, 5.01;

95% CI, 3.59 to 7.01) were signiﬁcantly higher in the

lenvatinib group (Table 5). Adverse events for lenvatinib

versus sorafenib included HFSR (grade $ 3: 3% v 11%),

diarrhea (any grade: 39% v 46%), alopecia (any grade:

3% v 25%) hypertension (grade $ 3: 23% v 14%), pro-

teinuria (grade $ 3: 6% v 2%), dysphonia (any grade:

24% v 12%), and hypothyroidism (any grade: 16% v 2%).

Patients in the lenvatinib group were more likely to dis-

continue treatment due to adverse events (relative risk

[RR], 1.46; 95% CI, 1.01 to 2.1; Table 4). Median duration

of treatment was 5.7 months versus 3.7 months in the

lenvatinib and sorafenib groups.

Atezo 1 Bev Versus Sorafenib

The IMbrave150 trial randomly assigned 336 patients to

treatment with atezo 1 bev and 165 patients to sorafenib.12

Patients were from Asia, excluding Japan (40%), and the

United States, Australia, New Zealand, or Japan (60%).

The underlying cause of HCC was HBV (48%), or HCV

(22%), with the remainder attributable to nonviral causes.

All patients underwent screening for varices prior to initi-

ating study treatment. Twenty-six percent had varices at

baseline, and 11% in the treatment and 14% in the control

groups underwent treatment. Approximately half of patients

had received prior local therapy for HCC. Additional patient

characteristics are included in Table 1.

Results for OS signiﬁcantly favored atezo 1 bev compared

with sorafenib, with an HR of 0.58 (95% CI, 0.42 to 0.79).

Median OS was 13.2 months (95% CI, 10.4 to not eval-

uated) in the sorafenib group and could not be evaluated in

the atezo 1 bev group. PFS (HR, 0.59; 95% CI, 0.47 to

0.76) and ORR (RECIST 1.1; odds ratio, 5.01; 95% CI, 3.59

to 7.01) were signiﬁcantly improved in the atezo 1 bev

group. Grade 3-4 adverse events for atezo 1 bev versus

sorafenib included HFSR (0% v 8%), diarrhea (2% v 5%),

and hypertension (15% v 12%), as well as increases in AST

(7% v 5%) and serum bilirubin (2% v 6%). Patients in the

atezo 1 bev group were more likely than patients in the

sorafenib group to discontinue treatment due to adverse

events (15.5% v 10.3%; Table 6). The HR for OS com-

paring the treatment-emergent antidrug antibody (ADA)-

positive subgroup of the atezo 1 bev arm to sorafenib was

0.93 (95% CI, 0.57 to 1.53). The OS HR comparing the

ADA-negative subgroup to sorafenib was 0.39 (95% CI,

0.26 to 0.60).29 In addition, time to deterioration (TTD) of

quality of life was signiﬁcantly delayed in the atezo 1 bev

group (median TTD, 11.2 months) compared with sor-

afenib (median TTD, 3.6 months).30

First-Line Therapy, Abstracts

Nivolumab Versus Sorafenib. The randomized phase III

multicenter Checkmate 459 study included 743 patients

who received ﬁrst-line therapy with nivolumab (240 mg

intravenously every 2 weeks) or sorafenib (400 mg orally

twice per day).28 Results reported in an abstract showed

that a predeﬁned threshold for signiﬁcance of OS (HR,

0.84; P 5 .0419) was not met; with a minimum follow-up of

22.8 months, HR for OS was 0.85 (95% CI, 0.72 to 1.02;

P 5 .0752). Four percent experienced a complete and

12% experienced a partial response in the nivolumab

group, while in the sorafenib group, 6% experienced

a partial response and 1% experienced a complete re-

sponse. Grade 3 or 4 adverse events related to treatment

were reported in 22% of patients receiving nivolumab and

49% of patients receiving sorafenib.

Second-Line Therapy, Full Text Articles

Four placebo-controlled multicenter randomized trials

addressed systemic therapy options in the second-line

setting following progression or intolerable toxicity with

sorafenib, including trials of ramucirumab, regorafenib,

cabozantinib, and pembrolizumab.23,24,26,27 No studies

addressing systemic therapy options after lenvatinib or

atezolizumab-bevacizumab met the inclusion criteria for

these guidelines. Across these four studies, the populations

were predominantly male ($ 81%). The underlying cause

of liver disease was most commonly HBV across studies

(range, 35%-38%); other causes included HCV, alcohol,

nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, or other or unknown etiology.

ECOG PS scores were 0-1. Two studies reported BCLC

stage, which was predominantly stage C (advanced; range,

86%-88% across groups) or stage B (intermediate; range,

11%-14%). Macrovascular invasion or extrahepatic spread

was present in 27%-34% and 70%-79% of experimental

and control groups, respectively. Virtually all included

patients had Child-Pugh class A liver disease. Additional

patient characteristics, including dosing information and

reported AFP levels, are included in Table 7.

Regorafenib Versus Placebo

The study by Bruix et al (RESORCE)24 compared regor-

afenib versus placebo in 573 patients who had previously

tolerated treatment and experienced radiologically docu-

mented progression with sorafenib. The patient population

was from Asia (38%; ie, China, Japan, South Korea, Sin-

gapore, and Taiwan) or elsewhere (62%). The cause of liver

disease was HBV (38%), HCV (21%), alcohol (25%), or

nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (7%). Twenty-eight percent of

patients had macrovascular invasion, and 72% had ex-

trahepatic spread (70% in the regorafenib group v 76% in

the placebo group). The pattern of progression after sor-

afenib for both treatment and control groups was new

extrahepatic lesion (41%), new intrahepatic lesion (45%),

or both (81%).

OS was signiﬁcantly better with regorafenib com-

pared with placebo (median survival, 10.6 months for

regorafenib v 7.6 months for placebo; HR, 0.63; 95% CI,

0.5 to 0.79; Table 8). Long survival time from start of

treatment with ﬁrst-line sorafenib was noted (regorafenib:

26.0 months; 95% CI, 22.6 to 28.1 months; v placebo:

19.2 months; 95% CI, 16.3 to 22.8 months), indicating

that this was a population with relatively stable disease

and good tolerance to sorafenib.31 Other outcomes, in-

cluding PFS, disease control rate, and ORR, also signif-

icantly favored regorafenib. Adverse events that were

signiﬁcantly more likely to occur with regorafenib were

hypertension (15% v 5%), HFSR (13% v 1%), fatigue

(9% v 5%), and diarrhea (3% v 0%). Seven deaths were

considered by investigators to be due to treatment with

regorafenib.

Cabozantinib Versus Placebo

The study by Abou-Alfa et al (CELESTIAL)23 compared

cabozantinib to placebo in 707 patients who had previously

received treatment with one regimen of sorafenib (71%-

73%) or up to two previous systemic treatment regimens

(26%-28%) and were not considered amenable to curative

treatment. The patient population was from Europe (48%),

Asia (25%; ie, Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore, and

Taiwan), Canada/United States (24%), and Australia/New

Zealand (4%). Cases were attributed to HBV (38%), HCV

(24%), alcohol (24% in the cabozantinib group, 16% in the

placebo group), nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (10%), or

unknown or other causes (21%). Eighty-ﬁve percent of

patients had macrovascular invasion and/or extrahepatic

spread (Table 7).

OS was signiﬁcantly better with cabozantinib compared

with placebo (median survival, 10.2 months for cabo-

zantinib v 8.0 months for placebo; HR, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.63

to 0.92). Other outcomes, including PFS, disease control

rate, and ORR also signiﬁcantly favored cabozantinib.

There were 18 partial responses out of 471 patients in the

treatment group and one partial response among patients

in the control group; no complete responses were observed

across study groups (Table 9). Grade 3 or 4 adverse events

were signiﬁcantly more common with cabozantinib versus

placebo (68% v 37%; RR, 1.86; 95% CI, 1.56 to 2.23), and

patients in the former group were more likely to discontinue

therapy due to adverse events related to the trial regimen

(16% v 3%). Patients treated with cabozantinib were more

likely to experience grade 3 or 4 hypertension (16% v 2%),

increased AST (12% v 7%), HFSR (17.0% v 0), fatigue

(10% v 4%), and diarrhea (10% v 2%; Table 10).

Ramucirumab Versus Placebo

The study by Zhu et al (REACH-2)27 of ramucirumab versus

placebo included 292 patients from the Americas, Europe,

Australia, and Israel (52%); Asia (excluding Japan; 28%);

and Japan (20%). Eligibility criteria included an AFP level

$ 400 ng/mL. There were 197 patients assigned to

treatment with ramucirumab, and 95 patients received

a placebo. Approximately 63% of cases were attributed to

HBV or HCV and 37% to other causes. Thirty-ﬁve percent of

patients had macrovascular invasion, and 72% had ex-

trahepatic spread. All patients were previously treated with

sorafenib only, and a subset of patients had also undergone

surgery (41%) or radiotherapy (19%). Sorafenib was dis-

continued due to progressive disease in 83% of patients

and toxicity in 17% of patients.

The REACH study,33 published in 2015, found no differ-

ence in OS between patients with advanced HCC who were

randomly assigned to either ramucirumab or placebo (HR,

0.87; 95% CI, 0.72 to 1.05) but found a signiﬁcant beneﬁt

of ramucirumab for subgroups of patients with extrahepatic

metastases (HR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.63 to 0.98) and AFP level

of $ 400 ng/mL (HR, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.51 to 0.90). The

REACH-2 study was conducted as a follow-up trial to ex-

plore the efﬁcacy of ramucirumab in the group of patients

with elevated AFP. Within this speciﬁc patient population,

Zhu et al27 found a signiﬁcant improvement in OS (HR,

0.710; 95% CI, 0.531 to 0.949), and PFS (HR, 0.45;

95% CI, 0.34 to 0.60; Table 11). ORR did not differ sig-

niﬁcantly between groups, with nine responses experi-

enced in the experimental and one response experienced

in the control group. In a pooling of data from REACH and

REACH-2, adverse events affecting at least 5% of patients

in the ramucirumab or placebo groups, respectively, in-

cluded hypertension (13% v 4%) and hyponatremia (5% v

2%; Table 10).

Pembrolizumab Versus Placebo

The study by Finn et al (Keynote 240)26 of pembrolizumab

versus placebo included 413 patients in Japan (14%),

elsewhere in East Asia (24%), Europe (34%), and the

United States (9%). Patients had experienced progressive

disease (87%) or intolerable toxicity (13%) with sorafenib.

Sixteen percent of all cases were HCV positive and

26% and 22% were HBV positive in the pembrolizumab

and placebo groups, respectively. Patients with main portal

vein or inferior vena cava or cardiac involvement were

excluded from the study. Median duration of follow-up was

13.8 months (range, 0.9-30.4 months) for pembrolizumab

and 10.6 months (range, 0.9-29.5 months) for placebo.

Some patients received additional treatment after pro-

gression, although the percent who received treatment was

not reported.

The HR for OS (0.781; 95% CI, 0.611 to 0.998; P 5 .0238)

did not reach statistical signiﬁcance as per the prespeciﬁed

statistical plan, which accounted for hypothesis testing at

multiple time points as well as coprimary endpoints (OS and

PFS). To reach statistical signiﬁcance, P values of .0174 for

OS at ﬁnal analysis and .002 for PFS at primary analyses

were required. Likewise, the PFS difference (HR, 0.72;

95% CI, 0.57 to 0.90) did not reach statistical signiﬁcance

as per the prespeciﬁed plan. ORRs were signiﬁcantly higher

in the pembrolizumab group (RR, 4.13; 95% CI, 1.82 to

9.38), and in this group there were six complete (2.2%) and

45 partial (16.2%) responses, while there were no com-

plete and six partial (4.4%) responses in the placebo group.

There was no difference in rate of stable disease between

groups, but progressive disease was less likely with pem-

brolizumab (RR, 0.77; 95% CI, 0.59 to 0.99; Table 12).

The most common grade 3 or 4 adverse events in the

pembrolizumab or placebo groups were AST increase

(13.3% v 7.5%), serum bilirubin increase (7.5% v 5.2%),

alanine transaminase increase (6.1% v 3.0%), and anemia

(3.9% v 9.0%). Treatment discontinuation due to grade 3

or 4 adverse events was signiﬁcantly more likely in the

pembrolizumab group (17.2% v 9.0%; RR, 2.74; 95% CI,

1.26 to 5.96; Table 10).

RECOMMENDATIONS

Clinical Question

What are the preferred treatment options for ﬁrst-line and

subsequent line systemic therapy for patients with ad-

vanced hepatocellular carcinoma?

First-Line Therapy

Recommendation 1.1. Atezolizumab-bevacizumab (atezo

1 bev) may be offered as ﬁrst-line treatment for most

patients with advanced HCC, Child-Pugh class A, ECOG PS

0-1, and following management of esophageal varices,

when present, according to institutional guidelines (Type:

evidence-based, beneﬁts outweigh harms; Evidence

quality: moderate to high; Strength of recommendation:

strong).

Qualifying statements:

• Recommendation 1.1 is based on results from the

IMbrave150 phase III RCT, which compared atezo 1

bev to sorafenib (HR for OS, 0.58; 95% CI, 0.42 to

0.79; P 5 .0006) in Child-Pugh class A patients.

Caution should be exercised when applying these

results to patients with more advanced liver disease

who have a greater likelihood of portal hypertension

because of the risk of bleeding complications asso-

ciated with bevacizumab.

• Due to risk of bleeding, patients in this trial were re-

quired to have undergone esophagogastroduodeno-

scopy (EGD) within 6 months of trial initiation and to

have received treatment of esophageal varices when

necessary.14 The Expert Panel recognizes that some

patients may have been evaluated for varices outside

the 6-month window, are receiving treatment (eg,

adequately dosed nonselective b-blockers), and/or are

deemed to be low risk for variceal bleed by a hep-

atology specialist. In these patients, the decision to

forgo an EGD prior to initiation of therapy with atezo 1

bev may be carefully considered.

• In an exploratory subgroup analysis, IMBrave150

study authors found that overall survival was not sig-

niﬁcantly different between treatment and control

groups in the subgroup of patients who tested positive

for treatment-emergent ADAs at 6 months (HR, 0.93;

95% CI, 0.57 to 1.53). The HR in the ADA-negative

subgroup to sorafenib was 0.39 (95% CI, 0.26 to

0.60).29

• Patients who had a myocardial infarction or stroke

within the previous 3 months, a history of autoimmune

disease, were on therapeutic anticoagulation, or had

coinfection with HBV and HCV were also excluded

from the IMbrave150 RCT.

Recommendation 1.2. Where there are contraindications to

atezolizumab and/or bevacizumab, tyrosine kinase in-

hibitors sorafenib or lenvatinib may be offered as ﬁrst-line

treatment of patients with advanced HCC, Child-Pugh class

A, and ECOG PS 0-1 (Type: evidence-based, beneﬁts

outweigh harms; Evidence quality: moderate; Strength of

recommendation: strong).

Qualifying statements:

• RCTs with the suggested options have been con-

ducted in Child-Pugh A patient populations. Real-

world studies and observational studies conducted

in patients with Child-Pugh B have shown a similar rate

of adverse events to the Child-Pugh A population but

relatively shorter overall survival. Treatment with rec-

ommended TKIs may be less effective for patients with

more advanced liver cirrhosis. Careful patient selection

is recommended.

• The choice of treatment with lenvatinib or sorafenib

should be made through a discussion involving the

physician and patient (and caregiver, where applica-

ble) and should include factors such as medical

history, viral etiology of liver disease, toxicities asso-

ciated with treatment, cost (see Cost Implications),

goals of treatment, patient preference, and expected

treatment beneﬁt. Factors affecting this choice, in-

cluding response rates, are discussed further in the

Clinical Interpretation.

• Several meta-analyses of RCTs have shown sor-

afenib to be more beneﬁcial in patients with HCV,

especially as compared with patients with HBV.15-17

In the REFLECT trial there was a trend toward im-

provements across endpoints for lenvatinib over

sorafenib in the HBV subgroup, though it was not

signiﬁcant.18

• Patients with a high tumor burden, . 50% liver in-

volvement, or those with main portal vein invasion were

excluded from the REFLECT trial of sorafenib versus

lenvatinib.19

Clinical interpretation. The combination of atezo 1 bev is

recommended as ﬁrst-line therapy based on the results of

the IMbrave150 trial (Recommendation 1.1). Sorafenib

and lenvatinib are recommended where there are con-

traindications to atezo 1 bev (Recommendation 1.2). The

following points may be considered when selecting from the

options presented in Recommendation 1.2:

• In an RCT, overall survival was found to be noninferior

with lenvatinib compared with sorafenib; however,

overall response and PFS were signiﬁcantly improved

with lenvatinib (Table 5).

• The adverse events proﬁles are similar, and there is

a relatively high risk of speciﬁc adverse events with

these two TKI treatment options (Table 4). There is

a higher rate of hypertension with lenvatinib and more

HFSR with sorafenib.18

• Overall, sorafenib has a low response rate but improves

time to radiographic progression and lengthens dis-

ease stability.14

• Patients treated with lenvatinib reported quality-of-life

scores that indicated a delay in deterioration compared

with sorafenib.

Second-Line Therapy

The decision to pursue second-line therapy and choice of

treatment should be based on patient and clinician pref-

erences and other factors, including comorbidities, liver

function, performance status, and potential for beneﬁt and

risk of harm associated with the treatment options. Options

for second-line therapy are included in Recommendations

2.1 to 2.3 and are described in greater detail in the Clinical

Interpretation.

Recommendation 2.1. Following ﬁrst-line treatment with

atezo 1 bev, second-line therapy with a TKI (ie, sorafenib,

lenvatinib, cabozantinib, or regorafenib) may be recom-

mended (Type: informal consensus, beneﬁts may outweigh

harms; Evidence quality: low; Strength of recommendation:

weak).

Qualifying statement:

• No data have been published on therapy options after

ﬁrst-line treatment with atezo 1 bev. It is the opinion of

the Expert Panel that a TKI, preferably sorafenib or

lenvatinib, may be offered. Cabozantinib or regorafenib

are also reasonable options for second-line therapy

following atezo 1 bev.

Recommendation 2.2. Following ﬁrst-line therapy with

sorafenib or lenvatinib, second-line therapy with another

TKI (cabozantinib or regorafenib), ramucirumab (AFP

$ 400 ng/mL), or atezo 1 bev may be recommended for

appropriate candidates. Considerations regarding choice of

therapy are included in the Clinical Interpretation (Type:

informal consensus, beneﬁts may outweigh harms; Evi-

dence quality: low to moderate; Strength of recommen-

dation: weak).

Qualifying statement:

• It is likely that most patients being considered for atezo

1 bev in the second-line setting did not have access to

this combination when they started ﬁrst-line treatment.

Recommendation 2.3. Following ﬁrst-line therapy with

sorafenib or lenvatinib, pembrolizumab or nivolumab are

reasonable options that may be considered for appropriate

candidates (Type: informal consensus, beneﬁts may out-

weigh harms; Evidence quality: low; Strength of recom-

mendation: weak).

Qualifying statement:

• Immune checkpoint inhibitors pembrolizumab or

nivolumab may be especially beneﬁcial for patients

who have contraindications to or cannot tolerate TKIs.

Clinical interpretation. To date, second-line therapy op-

tions have only been evaluated following therapy with

sorafenib; no second-line therapy options have been

evaluated following treatment with ﬁrst-line therapy options

lenvatinib or atezo 1 bev. It is the opinion of the Expert

Panel that data for treatment options following sorafenib

may be cautiously extrapolated to the population that has

received ﬁrst-line therapy with lenvatinib, as both agents

are TKIs. The Expert Panel also agrees that due to their

differing mechanisms of action, second-line treatment with

a TKI may offer clinical beneﬁt following treatment with

atezo 1 bev. Several second-line or greater therapies have

been evaluated following toxicity with or progression on

sorafenib. In these settings, overall survival was improved

compared with placebo with regorafenib, cabozantinib,

and ramucirumab in patients with higher AFP levels. In

addition to sorafenib and lenvatinib, options for second-

line therapy include regorafenib, cabozantinib, and

ramucirumab:

• Regorafenib is US Food and Drug Administration

(FDA)–approved as second-line therapy for patients

who have progressed on sorafenib, based on data from

the phase III placebo-controlled RESORCE trial that

excluded patients who were intolerant to sorafenib.

Sorafenib and regorafenib have almost identical mo-

lecular structures, and regorafenib may have a similar

but stronger toxicity proﬁle.34 Therefore, the appro-

priate population for regorafenib would be patients

with Child-Pugh A liver function who tolerated at least

400 mg of sorafenib for 20 days or longer during the

28-day period prior to disease progression.34

• Cabozantinib was evaluated in patients who were not

amenable to curative treatment and would be an

option for patients who were intolerant or refractory to

sorafenib or other previous lines of systemic therapy.

• A survival beneﬁt was found in the second-line setting

with the antiangiogenic agent ramucirumab in patients

refractory/intolerant to sorafenib with AFP $ 400

ng/mL.27

In addition, a phase III RCT of immune checkpoint inhibitor

pembrolizumab as second-line therapy following sorafenib

was included in the systematic review. The response rate of

18% in the pembrolizumab group was similar to that ob-

served in previous smaller studies; however, there was no

difference in PFS or OS compared with placebo.26 No other

fully published studies of ICIs met the inclusion criteria

for this review. A recommendation for consideration of

nivolumab as a second-line option is the consensus opinion

of the Expert Panel, based on a response rate that was

similar to pembrolizumab in a single-arm study35; however,

this should be interpreted with caution, as no randomized

trial data are available for this agent in the second-line

setting. The Expert Panel agrees that ICIs in the second-line

setting may be especially beneﬁcial for patients who have

contraindications to or cannot tolerate TKIs due to wors-

ening performance status. Further discussion of the role of

ICIs in the context of second-line therapy is included in the

Discussion.

Finally, extrapolating from the IMbrave150 study in the ﬁrst-

line setting, it is the opinion of the Expert Panel that atezo 1

bev may be considered as second-line therapy in select

patients who have progressed on or are intolerant of ﬁrst-

line sorafenib or lenvatinib. It is likely that most patients

receiving atezo 1 bev in the second-line setting did not

have access to this combination when they started ﬁrst-line

treatment.

Third-line therapy. In the CELESTIAL trial of cabozantinib,

192 patients (27%) were treated with third-line systemic

therapy. Within this subgroup of patients, the median

survival was 8.6 months for both the placebo and cabo-

zantinib groups (HR, 0.90; 95% CI, 0.63 to 1.29), although

PFS was signiﬁcantly improved by cabozantinib (HR, 0.58;

95% CI, 0.41 to 0.83), suggesting cabozantinib is an ap-

propriate option to consider in the third-line setting.23 As

this subgroup was underpowered for the primary endpoint,

however, this result indicates that placebo rather than

cabozantinib should remain the comparator in any new

clinical trials of third-line systemic therapy options.36

Cabozantinib is approved as a second-line and third-line

therapy option for patients with advanced HCC.37

DISCUSSION

Following the FDA approval of sorafenib for advanced liver

disease in December 2007, almost a decade passed

before additional therapy options became available. De-

spite recent advances, there are still signiﬁcant areas of

uncertainty and unmet need, including appropriate se-

quencing of therapy and lack of adequately powered

studies to identify subgroups that may beneﬁt more than

others from currently available treatment options. There

also continues to be a large unmet need for data to support

treatment beneﬁt in Child-Pugh class B patients.

Child-Pugh Class B

The majority of patients included in RCTs of systemic

therapy were relatively healthy, with preserved liver func-

tion, deﬁned as Child-Pugh class A, and with an ECOG-PS

of 0-1. A review of observational studies on the effective-

ness of sorafenib in Child-Pugh class B reported a range of

recommendations across studies, from limiting the in-

dication to Child-Pugh class A, cautiously expanding the

indication to a subset of Child-Pugh class B, or avoiding

a recommendation in the absence of data.38 The review

authors’ analysis of a sorafenib-treated “non-SHARP-

eligible” patient population found OS to be similar to best

supportive care (BSC; ie, approximately 5 months39), al-

though the safety proﬁle of sorafenib does not differ by

Child-Pugh class. A large multicenter prospective registry-

based single-arm study found that there was a higher rate of

sorafenib treatment discontinuation in the Child-Pugh B

and C groups compared with the Child-Pugh A group.40

In a retrospective case series of 18 Child-Pugh class B

patients treated with nivolumab, rates of adverse events

were high, although similar to those seen in a previous

study of Child-Pugh A patients, and two partial and one

complete response were recorded.41

Some published guidelines specify that certain systemic

therapy options are limited to the Child-Pugh class A

population.42,43 On the other hand, allocation systems,

such as BCLC, do not exclude Child-Pugh B patients from

treatment with sorafenib but recommend careful evaluation

of liver function and advise that optimal outcomes of sys-

temic therapy can only be expected with compensated liver

disease where the liver is still able to perform most of its

basic functions (ie, Child-Pugh stage A without ascites), as

well as emphasizing careful patient selection.8 The toler-

able dose of sorafenib in cohorts of patients with hepatic

and renal dysfunction has been explored.44

Despite the cautions and lack of randomized trials of pa-

tients with Child-Pugh class B, data suggest that sorafenib

is often prescribed regardless of liver function,40 with the

rate of prescription being approximately 12%-44% in pa-

tients with Child-Pugh class B HCC across various stud-

ies.45 In addition, Child-Pugh class is often not assessed

among patients in the United States, according to obser-

vational study data.40

Due to lack of inclusion of Child-Pugh class B patients in

randomized trials included in this review, systemic therapy

in this population was not included in the Recommenda-

tions section of this guideline. The Expert Panel agrees on

a cautious approach to systematic therapy in patients with

advanced HCC who are Child-Pugh class B with good

performance status, considering underlying liver function,

bleeding risk, presence of portal hypertension, extent of

extrahepatic spread, tumor burden, and major vascular

invasion. Furthermore, the Expert Panel recommends that

wherever possible, treatment decisions for patients with

advanced HCC be made by a multidisciplinary team, in-

cluding hepatologists, surgeons, radiologists (including

interventional radiologists), pathologists, and oncologists.

Third-Line Therapy

Patients who received cabozantinib following treatment

with one or two other systemic therapy regimens were

included in the CELESTIAL phase III RCT. Within this

subgroup, the median survival did not differ signiﬁcantly

between treatment and control groups.23 The sequence of

Journal of Clinical Oncology

therapy used in this trial is unlikely to be offered at the

present time, given the more recent publication of data that

have impacted recommendations for therapy in the ﬁrst-

line setting. Due to the lack of relevant data, the Expert

Panel did not include a formal recommendation for third-

line therapy within the Recommendations section but

acknowledges that third-line therapy may be considered in

Child-Pugh A patients with good performance status, using

a shared decision-making, multidisciplinary approach.

ICIs

Treatment with monoclonal antibodies pembrolizumab and

nivolumab has previously resulted in response rates of

14%-20%.46,47 As mentioned previously, in a phase III

study of pembrolizumab as second-line therapy following

sorafenib, the response rate was 18% (16% partial and

2% complete response) in the pembrolizumab group,

which is similar to that observed in previous smaller studies.

However, there was no difference in PFS or OS compared

with placebo; therefore, the study did not reach its primary

and secondary endpoints.26 Nivolumab was FDA approved

in September 2017 as a second-line therapy option, based

on a single-arm study that demonstrated an ORR of 14.3%,

according to blinded independent central review (RECIST

1.1).35,47 More recently, reported in an abstract, a phase III

study of nivolumab as ﬁrst-line therapy found a 10% re-

sponse rate for patients treated with nivolumab and no

difference in OS compared with sorafenib, and, therefore,

the study did not meet its primary endpoint.28 In addition,

most recently, the combination of nivolumab and ipilimu-

mab as second-line therapy has been given accelerated

approval by the FDA, based on results reported in an

abstract from a subgroup analysis of the CheckMate 040

phase I/II study that showed a 33% response rate with

treatment.48 This approval may be conditional on the results

of other conﬁrmatory trials.49,50 It is the Expert Panel’s

opinion that ICIs have a role in the treatment of patients with

advanced hepatocellular carcinoma and may be especially

beneﬁcial for patients who have contraindications to or

cannot tolerate TKIs. On the other hand, patients and

clinicians should be aware that life-threatening toxicities

can occur with ICIs. Future research on these options may

provide additional information on speciﬁc patient sub-

populations for which they could potentially be beneﬁcial.

Future Directions

Recent studies of systemic therapy in advanced HCC have

demonstrated an increased beneﬁt in terms of response

rate and survival from combined therapy.12 Future di-

rections in advanced HCC include emerging data on

combinations of TKIs and immune checkpoint inhibitors,

including

atezolizumab/cabozantinib,51

lenvatinib/pem-

brolizumab,52 nivolumab/ipilimumab,53 and other dual

checkpoint inhibitors.13 There is growing interest in com-

bining locoregional with systemic therapies; in a recent

study, Kudo et al54 demonstrated improved PFS in patients

with intermediate-stage HCC receiving combined endo-

vascular locoregional and systemic therapy, including

sorafenib in combination with on-demand TACE, as

compared with patients undergoing TACE alone. Results

from currently enrolling clinical trials combining locore-

gional therapy with systemic therapies including TKIs,

checkpoint inhibitors, as well as antivascular agents for the

treatment of advanced-stage HCC will inform the role and

judicious application of these strategies in this patient

population. The linearity of treatments from curative to

locoregional to systemic along the continuum of early to

advanced HCC may change in response to ﬁndings from

these trials. Most patients see a number of different

stakeholders long before they see an oncologist along the

course of care. As more effective therapies emerge, early

oncologic referral while hepatic function is still preserved

will be imperative. Changing treatment paradigms require

a thorough understanding of hepatic reserve and available

and emerging treatment options. Multidisciplinary man-

agement of the patient with HCC in an environment that

fosters dialogue, continuing education, and guideline-

driven consensus among stakeholders is key to optimiz-

ing patient outcomes.

Limited biomarker data have been published to guide

treatment selection for TKIs or ICIs, including the meta-

analyses cited previously that showed better efﬁcacy for

sorafenib in patients with HCV infection compared with

patients with HBV infection. However, there is still a need

for genetic and/or IHC biomarkers to guide treatment de-

cision making. The Expert Panel notes the emergence of

a subset of patients with HCC with a targetable driver

(FGF19) and some early data on the development of

FGFR4 inhibitors in this population; however, the efﬁcacy of

these agents or the appropriate context for their use (if any)

remains to be determined.55 The emergence of targeted

therapies in HCC and other solid tumors, including bio-

marker-speciﬁc/tumor-agnostic FDA-approved treatments,

emphasizes the need to obtain histologic diagnosis of HCC.

PATIENT AND CLINICIAN COMMUNICATION

Poor adherence to oral chemotherapy is an ongoing con-

cern with profound clinical implications and reduced

therapeutic efﬁcacy,56-58 which is especially relevant for

patients with HCC at risk for encephalopathy, esophageal

varices, and/or ascites. Interventions to optimize patient

adherence should be considered, such as involvement of

pharmacists in managing oral chemotherapy, which has

been shown to increase knowledge levels in a pilot study59

and has resulted in improved adherence and response

outcomes.60

For recommendations and strategies to optimize patient-

clinician communication, readers are referred to Patient-

Clinician Communication: American Society of Clinical

Oncology Consensus Guideline.61

HEALTH DISPARITIES

Although ASCO clinical practice guidelines represent ex-

pert recommendations on the best practices in disease

management to provide the highest level of cancer care, it is

important to note that many patients have limited access to

medical care. Racial and ethnic disparities in health care

contribute signiﬁcantly to this problem in the United States.

Patients with cancer who are members of racial/ethnic

minorities suffer disproportionately from comorbidities,

experience more substantial obstacles to receiving care,

are more likely to be uninsured, present at a more ad-

vanced stage, and are at greater risk of receiving care of

poor quality compared with other Americans.62-65 Many

Journal of Clinical Oncology

other patients lack access to care because of their geo-

graphic location and distance from appropriate treatment

facilities.

Up to 5.3 million people—2% of the US population—are

living with chronic HBV or HCV. Half of those with chronic

HBV infection are Asian and Paciﬁc Islander Americans.

HBV is the most common serious infection of the liver and

can lead to premature death from liver cancer or liver

failure. In 2013, to address HCV infection, and again in

2015 to address HBV infection, enhanced testing was

initiated in the United States.66 These initiatives were

intended to make screening a standard of care for ap-

propriate patient populations as well as to further other

goals, such as earlier detection and reducing stigma that

may discourage testing.

In the United States, overall incidence of HCC is 9.4 per

100,000 persons per year, but incidence of HCC varies by

race/ethnicity. According to an analysis of the SEER da-

tabase, incidence rates for the time period 2003-2011

were: Asian: 18.6 per 100,000; Black: 15.7 per 100,000;

Hispanic: 11.8 per 100,000; non-Hispanic Whites: 7 per

100,000. The incidence rate in the Asian population fell by

5.5% during this time, while incidence of both localized and

advanced HCC increased over this time period for other

ethnic groups.67 The study authors also found a trend to-

ward detection at an earlier stage for Asian populations,

possibly due to successful screening and surveillance.

Better OS for Asian individuals has also been observed,

which is likely related to this group’s relatively higher

proportion of patients with HCC due to HBV infection and

lower rate of underlying liver cirrhosis.68 Across all eth-

nicities there is a higher incidence among males than

females.

For patients with HCC, studies have shown disparities in

access to care, including liver transplantation, by race/

ethnicity.67,69-71 HCC was also detected at a more advanced

stage in an African American study population compared

with other racial/ethnic groups.72 Detection at an earlier

stage could help to reduce ethnic and racial disparities in

outcomes.73 Differences in outcomes are also evident and

persist even when receipt of treatment is the same, and

a signiﬁcant negative impact of low income has been found

on OS.70 Furthermore, geographic location in Southern US

states, which have a higher proportion of Black populations

and prevalence of known risk factors, has been associated

with higher mortality risk in HCC.74 At the same time,

, 10% of patients who take part in clinical trials are from

racial/ethnic minority groups.75

Data from a Medicare population show that only 27% of

patients with advanced HCC meeting study eligibility cri-

teria were initially treated with sorafenib after diagnosis,76

and in an analysis of SEER data, authors found that only

29.5% of patients received any treatment of HCC.68 While

there were no articles located as part of this review that

speciﬁcally addressed socioeconomic or racial and ethnic

disparities in the context of the target population of patients

receiving systemic therapy for advanced HCC, it seems

likely, given the treatment costs outlined in the Cost Im-

plications section, that such disparities exist and may in-

tensify

as

newer

costly

options

become

approved.

Underuse of curative treatment options can be due to

patient factors such as comorbidities, poor liver function,

and other patient characteristics; provider-related factors

including lack of expertise or knowledge; and technical

factors such as tumor location or limited organ availability.

Awareness of low rates of treatment with systematic therapy

and/or disparities in access to care and clinical trials and

outcomes should be considered in the context of this

clinical practice guideline, and health care providers

should strive to deliver the highest level of cancer care to

more vulnerable populations. It is equally important to

redeﬁne the context of HCC disparity research to include

the assessment of the impact of socioeconomic factors and

social policies on outcomes, to inform strategies to mini-

mize cancer treatment and outcome disparities. Finally,

social and health policies must emphasize prevention of

known risk factors for HCC, and a campaign for early

detection methods should be promoted within racial/ethnic

groups.

COST IMPLICATIONS

While conducting the systematic review for clinical in-

terventions, an informal scan for recent independently

conducted cost utility or economic analyses that might

inform the relative value of available treatment options was

also conducted. As a result, 12 studies of cost-effectiveness

of systematic therapy options for advanced HCC were

identiﬁed (Data Supplement, online only).77-88 These

studies most commonly stated a willingness to pay (WTP)

threshold for a quality-adjusted life-year (QALY; ie, 1 year in

perfect health) of $100,000 US dollars (USD), while some

studies used a WTP threshold of $50,000 USD. In addition

to the costs of the drugs, other costs included in the model

varied across studies but commonly included management

of adverse events, supportive care, follow-up and sur-

veillance, and end-of-life care. Results of the base-case

analyses from these studies are brieﬂy described

subsequently.

Four studies of ﬁrst-line sorafenib compared with BSC were

identiﬁed. Three of these studies, conducted in India,78

a military hospital in Egypt,79 and a hypothetical cohort in

Italy,77 respectively, found that sorafenib was not cost-

effective at deﬁned WTP thresholds. However, one study

found that dose-adjusted sorafenib was more cost-effective

than full-dose sorafenib and that the former option was

cost-effective at the deﬁned WTP threshold.77 A study that

did not incorporate QALYs found that sorafenib was cost-

effective at their WTP threshold for 1 life-year for patients

with compensated cirrhosis.83

Analyses conducted in Japan and Canada, respectively,

compared lenvatinib to sorafenib, applying the character-

istics of the patient population from the REFLECT trial.80,81

In both countries, the incremental cost-effectiveness ratios

(ICERs) were found to exceed the respective WTP

thresholds for 1 QALY for both drugs. Lenvatinib was found

to have higher cost-effectiveness in both countries, but the

higher cost of sorafenib was somewhat offset by costs

associated with a longer treatment duration with lenvatinib.

Six

cost-effectiveness

analyses

assessed

second-line

therapy options following treatment with sorafenib. Three

of these were studies of cabozantinib compared with BSC

or placebo, conducted for populations in the United States,

using assumptions based on the CELESTIAL RCT.82,86,87

One of these studies also provided estimates for the United

Kingdom and China. Across all three studies, the ICER for

cabozantinib exceeded the WTP threshold for 1 QALY.

Studies of the cost-effectiveness of regorafenib 1 BSC

compared with placebo 1 BSC or BSC alone, conducted in

the United States and with assumptions based on the

RESORCE RCT, found that the ICERs with regorafenib

exceeded the WTP threshold for 1 QALY.84,85 Likewise, the

cost of 1 QALY was found to exceed the ICER for ramu-

cirumab in patients with AFP levels of at least 400 ng/mL.88

The ﬁnding that the cost of these drugs exceeds WTP

thresholds in most cases reﬂects the balance of utility in

terms of survival and other outcomes and disutility resulting

from adverse events and relatively high drug costs. In

general, for HCC, costs of care are highest in the initial

treatment and terminal phases and lower in the continuing

care phase.89 Study authors suggest that the ICER could be

improved by lowering the cost82,84 or improving patient

selection, ideally with the use of biomarkers.86

Many study assumptions regarding patient characteristics,

utility, and disutility estimates are based on randomized trial

populations, which may not reﬂect the characteristics of

real-world populations.90 These analyses are based on

available cost information, but it is challenging to determine

actual drug costs because information on discounts and

rebates that could bring the ICER into the cost-effective

range are often not publicly available. On the whole, it is

expected that increased use of expensive medications will

be the cause of rising costs of HCC treatment; however,

incidence of HCC may be reduced by programs that screen

for and provide treatment of viral hepatitis and screening

among high-risk patients to detect HCC at a stage at which

treatment is less costly.89 Generic sorafenib, expected after

patent expiration in 2020,90 will perhaps make it cost-

effective in more scenarios. Going forward, we anticipate

that cost-utility analyses will eventually be published for the

combination atezo 1 bev, for which the full trial results have

recently been published.12 It would be helpful to see

a comparison of this newer combination with other ﬁrst-line

therapy options, to better inform treatment decision

making.

In addition, the discussion of cost has implications for the

disparities in care that are discussed in the Health Dis-

parities section; higher patient out-of-pocket costs have

been shown to be a barrier to initiating and adhering to

recommended cancer treatments.91,92 There remains an

urgent need for simpliﬁed standardized methodologies to

assess treatment costs and survival value93 and periodic

recurrent team-based patient engagement around ﬁnancial

toxicities related to cancer treatment94,95 and independent

impact on quality of life. Across all disease sites, ASCO

recommends that patients be made aware that different

products may be preferred or covered by their particular

insurance plan and that even with the same insurance plan,

the price may vary between different pharmacies. Patients

should also be made aware of any ﬁnancial counseling

services—including the many Patient Assistance Programs

offered by drug manufacturers—available to address this

complex set of issues.96 Studies that examine impact of

early involvement of palliative care and hepatology to

minimize inpatient hospitalizations that drive 64% of the

cost of care are also warranted.5

OPEN COMMENT

The draft recommendations were released to the public for

open comment from June 8 through June 22, 2020. Re-

sponse categories of “Agree as written,” “Agree with

suggested modiﬁcations,” and “Disagree. See comments”

were captured for every proposed recommendation, with

written comments received. A total of 100% of the 10

respondents either agreed or agreed with slight modiﬁca-

tions to the recommendations, and none of the re-

spondents disagreed. Expert Panel members reviewed

comments from all sources and determined whether to

maintain original draft recommendations, revise with minor

language changes, or consider major recommendation

revisions. As a result of feedback from two reviewers, level

of AFP was speciﬁed in the recommendations for ramu-

cirumab. A reviewer suggested including a recommenda-

tion

for

the

FDA-approved

combination

ipilimumab/

nivolumab following sorafenib. The Expert Panel agreed to

include this option in the Discussion section, rather than

make a recommendation, as the only data available were

published as a phase I/II abstract and have yet to be

conﬁrmed in a full publication. All changes were in-

corporated prior to Clinical Practice Guidelines Committee

review and approval.

GUIDELINE IMPLEMENTATION

ASCO guidelines are developed for implementation across

health settings. Each ASCO guideline includes one or more

member from ASCO’s Practice Guideline Implementation

Network (PGIN) on the panel. The additional role of this

PGIN representative on the guideline panel is to assess the

suitability of the recommendations to implementation in the

community setting and also to identify other barriers to

Journal of Clinical Oncology

implementation. Barriers to implementation include the

need to increase awareness of the guideline recommen-

dations among front-line practitioners and survivors of

cancer and caregivers and also to provide adequate ser-

vices in the face of limited resources. The guideline Bottom

Line Box was designed to facilitate implementation of

recommendations. This guideline will be distributed widely

through the ASCO PGIN. ASCO guidelines are posted on

the ASCO website and most often published in Journal of

Clinical Oncology.

This guideline included three panel members who are

members of the PGIN. In general, they indicated that the

guideline recommendations will be helpful for community

oncologists. Some considerations regarding implementa-

tion included the potential difﬁculty of independent medical

oncology practitioners to easily access the expertise of GI or

radiation oncology specialists when necessary, as well as

the uncertainty of the evidence for certain subgroups of

patients, such as Child-Pugh class B or patients with portal

hypertension. All PGIN members indicated that the con-

siderations outlined in the Cost Implications section are

a factor in implementation of the guideline recommenda-

tions so that patients can receive appropriate and timely

care. One PGIN member reported that the insurance ap-

proval for some of the options after ﬁrst-line therapy is

uncertain. Another noted a concern about the inability of

some patients to afford copayments. A third member re-

ported that it is not uncommon for patients who are unable

to pay for medications but who do qualify for ﬁnancial

assistance from a drug company to experience a delay in

assistance that results in cancer progression and patient

comorbidities worsening to an extent that the cancer

treatment becomes intolerable.