
Recommendations and Reports / Vol. 61 / No. 3 

July 6, 2012 

Updated CDC Recommendations for the Management of Hepatitis B 

Virus–Infected Health-Care Providers and Students

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report

Please note: An erratum has been published for this issue. To view the erratum, please click here.


Recommendations and Reports

Disclosure of Relationship

CDC, our planners, and our content experts wish to disclose 

that they have no financial interests or other relationships 

with the manufacturers of commercial products, suppliers of 

commercial services, or commercial supporters. Presentations 

will not include any discussion of the unlabeled use of a product 

or a product under investigational use. CDC does not accept 

commercial support.

The MMWR series of publications is published by the Office of Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30333.

Suggested Citation: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. [Title]. MMWR 2012;61(No. RR-3):[inclusive page numbers].

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Thomas R. Frieden, MD, MPH, Director

Harold W. Jaffe, MD, MA, Associate Director for Science

James W. Stephens, PhD, Director, Office of Science Quality

Stephen B. Thacker, MD, MSc, Deputy Director for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services

Stephanie Zaza, MD, MPH, Director, Epidemiology and Analysis Program Office

MMWR Editorial and Production Staff

Ronald L. Moolenaar, MD, MPH, Editor, MMWR Series

Christine G. Casey, MD, Deputy Editor, MMWR Series

Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor, MMWR Series

David C. Johnson, Lead Technical Writer-Editor

 Jeffrey D. Sokolow, MA, Project Editor

Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist

Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 

Stephen R. Spriggs, Terraye M. Starr

Visual Information Specialists

Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King

Information Technology Specialists

MMWR Editorial Board

William L. Roper, MD, MPH, Chapel Hill, NC, Chairman

Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH, Ann Arbor, MI

Virginia A. Caine, MD, Indianapolis, IN

Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA, Los Angeles, CA

David W. Fleming, MD, Seattle, WA

William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH, Newark, NJ

King K. Holmes, MD, PhD, Seattle, WA

Deborah Holtzman, PhD, Atlanta, GA

Timothy F. Jones, MD, Nashville, TN

Dennis G. Maki, MD, Madison, WI

Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH, Des Moines, IA

Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH, Madison, WI

John V. Rullan, MD, MPH, San Juan, PR

William Schaffner, MD, Nashville, TN

Dixie E. Snider, MD, MPH, Atlanta, GA

John W. Ward, MD, Atlanta, GA

CONTENTS

Introduction  ...........................................................................................................1

Methods  ...................................................................................................................2

Major Trends in Regard to Providers with HBV Infection  .......................2

Health-Care Provider-to-Patient Transmission of HBV  ........................2

National Trends in Acute Hepatitis B Incidence and Prevalence  .....4

Treatments for Chronic Hepatitis B Infection  .........................................4

Consistency with Other Guidelines  ............................................................4

Prevention Strategies  ..........................................................................................5

Standard Precautions  ......................................................................................5

Work Practice and Engineering Controls  .................................................6

Testing and Vaccination of Health-Care Providers  ................................6

 Actions Taken Against HBV-Infected Health-Care Providers and 

Students  .............................................................................................................6

Technical and Ethical Issues in Developing Recommendations  .........6

Monitoring HBV DNA Level and Hepatitis B e Antigen (HBeAg)  .....6

Assessing a Safe Level of HBV DNA  ............................................................7

Fluctuating HBV DNA Levels  .........................................................................7

Specifying Exposure-Prone Procedures ....................................................7

Notification of Patients of HBV-Infected Health-Care Providers  ......8

Ethical Considerations  ....................................................................................8

Guidance for Expert Review Panels at Institutions  ...............................9

Recommendations for Chronically HBV-Infected Health-Care 

Providers and Students  ....................................................................................9

Practice Scope  ....................................................................................................9

Hepatitis B Vaccination and Screening  .....................................................9

 Expert Panel Oversight Not Needed  ...................................................... 10

Expert Panel Oversight Recommended  ................................................ 10

Institutional Policies and Procedures  ..................................................... 10

CONTENTS (Continued)


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / July 6, 2012 / Vol. 61 / No. 3 

1

The material in this report originated in the National Center for 

HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Kevin 

Fenton, MD, PhD, Director, and the Division of Viral Hepatitis, John 

W. Ward, MD, Director. 

Corresponding preparer: Scott D. Holmberg, MD, Division of Viral 

Hepatitis, 1600 Clifton Rd, NE, MS G-37, Atlanta, GA 30329. 

Telephone: 404-718-8550; Fax: 404-718-8585; E-mail: sdh1@cdc.gov. 

Introduction 

In 1991, CDC published recommendations to prevent 

transmission of bloodborne viruses from infected health-care 

providers to patients while conducting exposure-prone invasive 

procedures (1). These recommendations did not prohibit the 

continued practice of invasive surgical techniques by HBV-

infected surgeons, dentists, and others, provided that the nature 

of their illnesses and their practices are reviewed and overseen 

by expert review panels. Essential elements of the 1991 CDC 

recommendations relevant to HBV included that 1) there be 

no restriction of activities for any health-care provider who does 

not perform invasive (exposure-prone) procedures; 2) exposure-

prone procedures should be defined by the medical/surgical/

dental organizations and institutions at which the procedures 

are performed; 3) providers who perform exposure-prone 

procedures and who do not have serologic evidence of immunity 

to HBV from vaccination should know their HBsAg status and, 

if that is positive, also should know their hepatitis B e-antigen 

(HBeAg) status; and 4) providers who are infected with HBV 

(and are HBeAg-positive) should seek counsel from and perform 

procedures under the guidance of an expert review panel (1). 

The 1991 recommendations also recommended that an 

HBV-infected health-care provider who performed exposure-

prone procedures, broadly defined, should notify patients 

Updated CDC Recommendations for the Management of Hepatitis B 

Virus–Infected Health-Care Providers and Students 

Prepared by

Scott D. Holmberg, MD 

Anil Suryaprasad, MD 

John W. Ward, MD 

Division of Viral Hepatitis, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention 

Summary 

This report updates the 1991 CDC recommendations for the management of hepatitis B virus (HBV)–infected health-care 

providers and students to reduce risk for transmitting HBV to patients during the conduct of exposure-prone invasive procedures 

(CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during 

exposure-prone invasive procedures. MMWR 1991;40[No. RR-8]). This update reflects changes in the epidemiology of HBV 

infection in the United States and advances in the medical management of chronic HBV infection and policy directives issued by 

health authorities since 1991. 

The primary goal of this report is to promote patient safety while providing risk management and practice guidance to HBV-

infected health-care providers and students, particularly those performing exposure-prone procedures such as certain types of surgery. 

Because percutaneous injuries sustained by health-care personnel during certain surgical, obstetrical, and dental procedures provide 

a potential route of HBV transmission to patients as well as providers, this report emphasizes prevention of operator injuries and 

blood exposures during exposure-prone surgical, obstetrical, and dental procedures. 

These updated recommendations reaffirm the 1991 CDC recommendation that HBV infection alone should not disqualify 

infected persons from the practice or study of surgery, dentistry, medicine, or allied health fields. The previous recommendations have 

been updated to include the following changes: no prenotification of patients of a health-care provider’s or student’s HBV status; use 

of HBV DNA serum levels rather than hepatitis B e-antigen status to monitor infectivity; and, for those health-care professionals 

requiring oversight, specific suggestions for composition of expert review panels and threshold value of serum HBV DNA considered 

“safe” for practice (&lt;1,000 IU/ml). These recommendations also explicitly address the issue of medical and dental students who 

are discovered to have chronic HBV infection. For most chronically HBV-infected providers and students who conform to current 

standards for infection control, HBV infection status alone does not require any curtailing of their practices or supervised learning 

experiences. These updated recommendations outline the criteria for safe clinical practice of HBV-infected providers and students 

that can be used by the appropriate occupational or student health authorities to develop their own institutional policies. These 

recommendations also can be used by an institutional expert panel that monitors providers who perform exposure-prone procedures. 


Recommendations and Reports

2 

MMWR / July 6, 2012 / Vol. 61 / No. 3

in advance regarding the provider’s seropositivity. However, 

scientific data and clinical experience accumulated since 1991 

demonstrate that the risk for HBV and other bloodborne virus 

transmission from providers in health-care settings is extremely 

low. In addition, improvements in infection control practices 

put into effect since 1991 have enhanced both health-care 

provider and patient protection from exposure to blood and 

bloodborne viruses in health-care settings. 

This report is intended to guide the practices of chronically 

HBV-infected providers and students and the institutions that 

employ, oversee, or train them; it does not address those with 

acute HBV infection. This report is limited to the provider-

to-patient transmission of HBV; it does not address infection 

control measures to prevent bloodborne transmission of HBV 

to patients through receipt of human blood products, organs, 

or tissues because these measures have been described elsewhere 

(2). Nor does this report provide comprehensive guidance 

about prevention of patient-to-health-care provider bloodborne 

pathogen transmission because this guidance also has been 

published previously (3,4). On the basis of a through literature 

review, reports of providers who experienced curtailed scope of 

practice, and expert consultation, CDC considered the following 

issues when developing these recommendations:1) very rare or, for 

most types of clinical practice, no detected transmission of HBV 

from providers to patients; 2) nationally decreasing trends in the 

incidence of acute HBV infection in both the general population 

and health-care providers; 3) successful implementation and 

efficacy of policies promoting hepatitis B vaccination; 4) evolving 

and improving therapies for HBV infection; 5) guidelines in 

the United States and other developed countries that propose 

expert-based approaches to the risk management of infected 

health-care providers; 6) the adoption of Standard Precautions 

(formerly known as universal precautions) as a primary prevention 

intervention for the protection of patients and providers from 

infectious agent transmission; 7) the implementation of improved 

work practice and engineering controls, including safety devices; 8) 

the testing and vaccination of providers; 9) increasing availability 

of HBV viral load testing; and 10) instances of restrictions or 

prohibitions for HBV-infected providers and students that are 

not consistent with CDC and other previous recommendations. 

Methods 

To update recommendations for the risk management of HBV-

infected health-care providers and students, CDC considered 

data that have become available since the 1991 recommendations 

were published. Information reviewed was obtained through 

literature searches both by standard search engines (PubMed) 

and of other literature reviews used in guidelines developed by 

other professional organizations since 1991. Search terms used 

included “hepatitis B,” “hepatitis B virus,” or “HBV” with 

“healthcare,” “health-care,” “healthcare workers” or “providers” 

or “personnel”; “nosocomial” or “healthcare transmission”; and 

“healthcare worker-to-patient.” However, these searches did not 

identify additional cases beyond the few already known to CDC 

and the experts consulted. To gather data on HBV transmission, 

CDC reviewed all hepatitis B outbreak investigations conducted 

by CDC and state officials since 1991. CDC national hepatitis 

surveillance data were examined for reports of acute HBV 

infection in persons with information about recent health 

care, as well as reports received regarding dismissal of HBV-

infected health-care providers (i.e., surgeons) or prohibition 

from matriculation of medical, dental, and osteopathic students 

identified as HBV-infected after acceptance (see Actions Taken 

Against HBV-Infected Health Care Providers and Students). 

Medical, dental, infection control, public health, infectious 

disease, and hepatology experts, officials, and representatives 

from government, academia, the public, organizations 

representing medical, dental and osteopathic colleges, and 

professional medical organizations were consulted.* Some 

were consulted at an initial meeting on June 4, 2011. All 

experts and organizations were provided draft copies of these 

recommendations as they were developed, and they provided 

insights, information, suggestions, and edits. In finalizing these 

recommendations, CDC considered all available information, 

including expert opinion, results of the literature review, 

findings of outbreak investigations, surveillance data, and 

reports of adverse actions taken against HBV-infected surgeons 

and students. 

Major Trends in Regard to Providers 

with HBV Infection 

Health-Care Provider-to-Patient 

Transmission of HBV 

Since publication of the 1991 CDC recommendations (1), 

CDC has accrued substantial information about HBV-infected 

health-care providers and students. Many interventions, 

including the adoption of Standard Precautions (formerly known 

as universal precautions) and double-gloving during invasive 

surgical procedures, have eliminated almost completely the very 

low risk for transmission of HBV (as well as hepatitis C virus 

[HCV] and human immunodeficiency virus) during exposure-

prone procedures. In developing these recommendations, CDC 

weighed the risk for HBV transmission based on the following: 

* A list of the persons consulted appears on page 10.


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / July 6, 2012 / Vol. 61 / No. 3 

3

1) documented cases of confirmed transmission of HBV from 

health-care providers to patients are rare (up to eight cases from 

one surgeon in the United States since 1994), 2) it has not 

been possible to conduct case-control or cohort studies that 

estimate the rate of such rare events, and 3) data are insufficient 

to quantify the strength-of-evidence or enable the grading of a 

recommendation (5). 

Nonetheless, CDC and state authorities have been able to 

detect instances of patient-to-patient transfer of HBV (and 

HCV) from unsafe injection and dialysis practices, sharing of 

blood-glucose monitoring equipment, and other unsanitary 

practices and techniques (6). One report from an oral surgery 

practice documented patient-to-patient HBV transmission, 

although a retrospective assessment did not identify 

inappropriate procedures (7). However, despite detecting 

patient-to-patient transmission, there is only one published 

report of health-care provider-to-patient transmission of HBV 

during exposure-prone procedures in the United States since 

1994 (8). In that case, an orthopedic surgeon who was unaware 

of his HBV status and who had a very high level of HBV DNA 

(viral load &gt;17 million IU/ml) (9) transmitted HBV to between 

two and eight patients during August 2008–May 2009 (10). 

An international review of HBV health-care provider-to-

patient transmissions in other countries in which the HBV 

DNA levels (viral load) of the providers were measured has 

determined that 4 x 104 genome equivalents per ml (GE/ml) 

(roughly comparable to 8,000 international units (IU)/ml) 

was the lowest level of HBV DNA in any of several surgeons 

implicated in transmission of HBV to patients between 1992 

and 2008 (9–15; Table 1). This lowest measurement was 

taken &gt;3 months after the suspected transmission event, so 

the relevance of the HBV DNA viral load to transmissibility 

TABLE 1. Cases of surgeon-to-patient transmission of hepatitis B virus (HBV) in which the surgeon’s HBV DNA was quantified

Location of reported case (yr)

Profession

HBV DNA

 (GE/ml)*

HBV 

e-antigen 

Quantification technique 

Time sample taken 

after transmission

United States (1992)†

Thoracic surgery resident

1.0 X 109

Positive

Semi-quantitative PCR dot-blot 

hybridization, with comparison 

serum containing 108 

chimpanzee- infectious particles 

4 mos 

United Kingdom 

(1990–1997)§

Cardiothoracic surgeon 

109

Positive

Semi-quantification by end-point 

dilution

6 mos

General surgeon 

108

Positive

&gt;8 wks

General surgeon

109

Positive

Unknown

General surgeon

107

Positive

Unknown

Cardiothoracic surgeon

105

Positive

Unknown

United Kingdom 

(1988, 1993–1995)¶

General surgeon

1.0 X 107

Negative

Liquid hybridization and enzyme-

linked oligonucleotide assay

12 wks 

Gynecologist 

4.4 X 106

Negative

Unknown

Gynecologist 

5.5 X 106

Negative

Unknown

General surgeon

2.5 X 105

Negative

12 wks

United Kingdom (1999)**

Surgeon

1.03 X 106

Negative

Lightcycler PCR

Unknown

Netherlands (1998–1999)††

Surgeon

5.0 X 109

Positive

Limited dilution PCR

1 yr 

United Kingdom 

(1988–1997)§§

Surgeon

1.12 X 108

Negative 

Chiron Quantiplex Branched DNA 

assay and Roche Amplicor HBV 

DNA monitor assay 

At least 3 

mos after 

transmission in 

all surgeons 

Surgeon

2.55 X 105

Surgeon

6.72 X 105

Surgeon

6.35 X 104 

Surgeon

4.20 X 108¶¶

Surgeon

9.47 X 108

United States (2008)***

Orthopedic surgeon

1.79 X 107

Positive

Versant 3.0 third generation 

branched DNA assay 

14 wks 

 * GE/ml, genome equivalents/ml; generally, approximately five times comparable measurement of international units (IU)/ml. 

 

† Source: Harpaz R, von Seidlin L, Averhoff AM, et al. Transmission of hepatitis B virus to multiple patients from a surgeon without evidence of inadequate infection 

control. N Engl J Med 1996;334:549–54.

 

§ Source: Ngui SL, Watkins RPF, Heptonstall J, Teo CG. Selective transmission of hepatitis B after percutaneous exposure. J Infect Dis 2000;181:838–43.

 

¶ Source: The Incident Investigation Teams and Others. Transmission of hepatitis to patients from four infected surgeons without hepatitis B e antigen. N Engl J Med 

1997;336:178–84.

 ** Source: Molyneaux P, Reid TM, Collacott I, Mcintyre PG, Dillon JF, Laing RB. Acute hepatitis B in two patients transmitted from an e antigen negative cardiothoracic 

surgeon. Commun Dis Publ Health 2000;3:250–2.

 †† Source: Spijkerman IJ, van Doorn LJ, Janssen MH, et al. Transmission of hepatitis B virus from a surgeon to his patients during high risk and low risk surgical 

procedures during 4 years. Infect Contr Hosp Epidemiol 2002;23:306–12.

 §§ Source: Corden S, Ballard AJ, Ijaz S, et al. HBV DNA levels and transmission of hepatitis B by health care workers. J Clin Virol 2003;27:52–8.

 ¶¶ Lowest value in any transmitting surgeon; average of testing at two laboratories using the same (Roche) assay.

 *** Source: Enfield KB, Sharapov U, Hall K, et al. Transmission of hepatitis B virus to patients from an orthopedic surgeon [Abstract no. 420]. Presented at the 5th 

Decennial International Conference on Healthcare-Associated Infections, Atlanta, Georgia; March 18–20, 2010. Available at http://shea.confex.com/shea/2010/

webprogram/Paper2428.html.


Recommendations and Reports

4 

MMWR / July 6, 2012 / Vol. 61 / No. 3

is unclear. In general, those surgeons who transmitted HBV to 

patients appear to have had HBV DNA viral loads well above 

105 GE/ml (or above 20,000 IU/ml) at the earliest time that 

viral load was tested after transmission (Table 1). However, the 

few studies conducted in nonhuman primates have reported 

different results regarding the correlation between HBV DNA 

levels in blood and infectivity. One study found a correlation 

(16), but another did not (17). 

In addition to the rarity of surgery-related transmission of 

HBV since 1994 (one reported instance), the most recent 

case of HBV transmission from a U.S. dental health-care 

provider to patients was reported in 1987 (18,19). Since this 

event, certain infection control measures are thought to have 

contributed to the absence of detected transmissions; such 

measures include widespread vaccination of dental health-care 

professionals, universal glove use, and adherence to the tenets 

of the 1991 Occupational Safety and Health Administration 

(OSHA) Bloodborne Pathogens Standard (20). Since 1991, no 

transmission of HBV has been reported in the United States 

or other developed countries from primary care providers, 

clinicians, medical or dental students, residents, nurses, other 

health-care providers, or any others who would not normally 

perform exposure-prone procedures (21). 

National Trends in Acute Hepatitis B 

Incidence and Prevalence 

Symptomatic acute HBV infections in the United States, 

as reported through health departments to CDC, have 

declined approximately 85% from the early 1990s to 2009 

(22), following the adoption of universal infant vaccination 

and catch-up vaccinations for children and adolescents (23). 

If declining trends continue, an ever-increasing proportion 

of patients receiving health care and their providers will be 

protected by receipt of hepatitis B vaccination. 

Patient-to-health-care provider transmission of HBV also has 

declined markedly. Reflecting this finding, the reported number 

of acute HBV infections among providers in the United States, 

not all of which reflect occupational exposure, decreased from 

approximately 10,000 in 1983 to approximately 400 in 2002 

(24) and to approximately 100 by 2009 (22). 

Treatments for Chronic 

Hepatitis B Infection 

Medications for hepatitis B have been improving continually 

and are usually effective at reducing viral loads markedly or even to 

undetectable levels. Currently, seven therapeutic agents are approved 

by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of chronic 

hepatitis B, including two formulations of interferon (interferon 

alpha and pegylated interferon) and five nucleoside or nucleotide 

analogs (lamuvidine, telbivudine, abacavir, entecavir, and tenofovir). 

Among the approved analogs, both entecavir and tenofovir have 

potent antiviral activity as well as very low rates of drug resistance. 

Treatment with these agents reduces HBV DNA levels to undetectable 

or nearly undetectable levels in most treated persons (25–27). 

Virtually all treated patients, even those few still receiving older agents 

(e.g., lamuvidine), can expect to achieve a reduction of HBV DNA 

viral loads to very low levels within weeks or months of initiating 

therapy (25). The newer medications are effective in suppressing 

viral replication, and it is expected that they will be used for a newly 

identified HBV-infected health-care provider who is performing 

exposure-prone procedures and who has HBV virus levels above the 

threshold suggested in this report (1,000 IU/ml [i.e., about 5,000 

genome equivalents (GE)/ml]) or as adopted by his or her institution’s 

expert review panel. However, clinicians caring for infected health-

care providers or students who are not performing exposure-prone 

procedures and who are not subject to expert panel review should 

consider both the benefits and risks associated with life-long antiviral 

therapy for chronic HBV started at young ages (25). 

Consistency with Other Guidelines 

Recommendations for the management of HBV-infected 

health-care providers and students have evolved in the United 

States and other developed countries (Table 2). In 2010, the 

Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA) 

issued updated guidelines that recommended a process 

for ensuring safe clinical practice by HBV-infected health-

care providers and students (28). These separate guidelines 

classify many invasive procedures and list those associated 

with potentially increased risk for provider-to-patient blood 

exposures (Category III procedures, in the SHEA guidelines). 

SHEA recommends restricting a provider’s practice on the 

basis of the provider’s HBV DNA blood levels and the conduct 

of certain invasive procedures considered exposure prone. 

The SHEA guidelines also address the current therapeutic 

interventions that reduce the viral loads and the infectiousness 

of HBV-infected personnel. For providers practicing certain 

exposure-prone procedures, SHEA recommends that they 

maintain HBV blood levels &lt;104 GE/ml, i.e., depending on 

the assay used, approximately 2,000 IU/ml (exposure prone, 

Category III) procedures, or cease surgery until they can 

reestablish a viral load level below that threshold. 

Restrictions based on the provider’s HBV DNA blood levels 

also exist in guidelines published by some European countries 

and Canada (Table 2) (21,29–36). No guidelines from any 

developed country recommend the systematic prohibition of 

invasive surgical or dental practices by qualified health-care 

providers whose chronic HBV infection is monitored. 

Please note: An erratum has been published for this issue. To view the erratum, please click here.


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / July 6, 2012 / Vol. 61 / No. 3 

5

The generally permissive principles delineated in the CDC 

1991 recommendations also have been reiterated in recent 

Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) 

recommendations on immunization of health-care personnel in 

the United States for HBV infection (37). ACIP recommends 

that HBV-infected persons who perform highly exposure-prone 

procedures should be monitored by a panel of experts drawn 

from diverse disciplines and perspectives to ensure balanced 

recommendations. However, the ACIP recommendations do 

not require that HBV-infected persons who do not perform 

such procedures have their clinical duties restricted or managed 

by a special panel because of HBV infection alone. 

Prevention Strategies 

Standard Precautions 

Strategies to promote patient safety and to prevent 

transmission of bloodborne viruses in health-care settings 

include hepatitis B vaccination of susceptible health-care 

personnel and the use of primary prevention (i.e., preventing 

exposures and therefore infection) by strict adherence to the 

tenets of standard (universal) infection control precautions, 

the use of safer devices (engineering controls), and the 

implementation of work practice controls (e.g., not recapping 

needles) to prevent injuries that confer risks for HBV 

transmission to patients and their providers. Public health 

officials in the United States base Standard Precautions on the 

premise that all blood and blood-containing body fluids are 

potentially infectious (3,4). Since 1996, CDC has specified 

the routine use of Standard Precautions (38,39) that include 

use of protective equipment in appropriate circumstances, 

implementation of both work practice controls and 

engineering controls, and adherence to meticulous standards 

for cleaning and reusing patient care equipment. For example, 

double-gloving now is practiced widely, and the evidence 

to demonstrate the feasibility and efficacy of this and other 

interventions is extensive (40–44). 

TABLE 2. Recommendations for the management of health-care providers (HCP) with hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection*

HBV-infected HCP

SHEA (2010)

ACS (2004)

Europe (2003)†

Canada (2000)

United Kingdom (2000) United States (1991)

Screening

—§

All surgeons

All who do EPP 

and who do 

not respond to 

vaccination

—

All who do EPP

All who do EPP

Vaccination

—

All surgeons

All who do EPP

—

All who do EPP

All who do EPP

Management of HBV-infected HCP performing EPP

Hepatitis B e-antigen

Not required 

to be negative

Not required 

to be negative 

Required to 

be negative

Required to 

be negative

Required to 

be negative

Required to 

be negative

HBV DNA

&lt;104 GE/ml

—

Variable 

by country 

&lt;102–&lt;104 

GE/ml

&lt;105 GE/ml 

initially and 

&lt;103 GE/ml 

on therapy

&lt;103 GE/ml

(test not 

available)

Frequency of 

monitoring

6 mos

—

3 mos if doing 

EPP; 12 mos for 

other HCP

—

12 mos

—

Expert panel

Yes 

Yes

Yes

Yes

—  

Yes

Abbreviations: ACS = American College of Surgeons; EPP = exposure-prone procedures; GE/ml = genome equivalents/ml (roughly equal to 5 International Units/ml 

depending on assay used); SHEA = Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America.

* Sources: CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of HIV and HBV virus to patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures. MMWR 1991;40(No. 

RR-8); Henderson DK, Dembry L, Fishman NO, et al. SHEA guideline for management of healthcare workers who are infected with hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus 

and/or human immunodeficiency virus. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2010;31:203–32; American College of Surgeons. Statement on the surgeon and hepatitis. 

Available at http://www.facs.org/fellows_info/statements/st-22.html; Health Canada. Proceedings of the consensus conference on infected health care worker risk 

for transmission of bloodborne pathogens. Can Commun Dis Rep 1998;24(suppl 4):1–28. Available at http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/webarchives/20071124025757/

http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/publicat/ccdr-rmtc/98vol24/24s4/index.html; UK Department of Health. Hepatitis B infected healthcare workers: guidance on 

implementation of health service circular 2000/020. UK Department of Health. Hepatitis B infected healthcare workers and antiviral therapy. 2007. Available at http://

www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_073164; U.K. Department of Health. Health Services Guidelines HSG 

(93)40. Protecting health care workers and patients from hepatitis B. Available at http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/@dh/@en/

documents/digitalasset/dh_4088384.pdf; Gunson RN, Shouval D, Roggendorf M, et al. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections in health care 

workers (HCWs): guidelines for prevention of transmission of HBV and HCV from HCW to patients. J Clin Virol 2003;27:213–30.

† Consensus conference included representatives from Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Holland, Israel, Italy, Portugal, The Republic of Ireland, Sweden, the 

United Kingdom, and the United States.

§ Issue not addressed in recommendation or guideline.


Recommendations and Reports

6 

MMWR / July 6, 2012 / Vol. 61 / No. 3

Work Practice and Engineering Controls 

 Parenteral exposures are mainly responsible for HBV 

transmission in health-care settings. Work practice modifications 

in the past 20 years have been important in mitigating such 

exposures. Examples of such modifications include the practice 

of not resheathing needles, the use of puncture-resistant needle 

and sharp object disposal containers, avoidance of unnecessary 

phlebotomies and other unnecessary needle and sharp object 

use, the use of ports and other needleless vascular access 

when practical or possible, and the avoidance of unnecessary 

intravenous catheters by using needleless or protected needle 

infusion systems. 

Testing and Vaccination of 

Health-Care Providers 

Recommendations generated over the past 20 years, both 

in the United States and other developed countries, urge all 

health-care providers to know their HBV and other bloodborne 

virus infection status (21), especially if they are at risk for HBV 

infection (37,45). OSHA mandates that hepatitis B vaccine 

be made available to health-care providers who are susceptible 

to HBV infection and that they be urged to be vaccinated 

(Bloodborne Pathogens Standard [29 CFR 1910.1030 and 29 

CFR 1910.030f]) These guidelines stipulate that the employer 

make available the hepatitis B vaccine and vaccination series 

to all employees who have occupational exposure and that 

postexposure evaluation and follow-up be provided to all 

employees who have an exposure incident. 

Approximately 25% or more of medical and dental students 

(46,47) and many physicians, surgeons, and dentists in the 

United States have been born to mothers in or from countries 

in Asia (including India), Africa, and the Middle East with high 

and intermediate endemicity for HBV. CDC recommends that 

all health-care providers at risk for HBV infection be tested and 

that all those found to be susceptible should receive vaccine 

(37). Such testing is likely to detect chronically infected health-

care providers and students. Recommendations to ensure safe 

practice of health-care providers identified as chronic carriers 

of HBV should have reasonable and feasible oversight by the 

relevant school, hospital, or other health-care facility. 

 Actions Taken Against HBV-Infected 

Health-Care Providers and Students 

CDC is aware of several recent instances in which 

HBV-infected persons have been threatened with dismissal 

or actually dismissed from surgical practice on the basis of 

their HBV infection, and others have had their acceptances 

to medical or dental schools rescinded or deferred because of 

their infection (Joan M. Block, Hepatitis B Foundation, Anna 

S. F. Lok, University of Michigan Medical Center, personal 

communications, 2011). Some of these instances have involved 

requirements that the infected provider, applicant, or student 

demonstrate undetectable HBV viral load or hepatitis B 

e-antigen negativity and, in at least one case, that this be 

demonstrated continuously by weekly testing. These actions 

might not be based on clear written guidance and procedures 

at the institutions involved (48,49). 

Technical and Ethical Issues in 

Developing Recommendations 

Monitoring HBV DNA Level and 

Hepatitis B e Antigen (HBeAg) 

Whereas the 1991 recommendations assessed the infectivity 

of surgeons and others performing invasive procedures based on 

the presence of HBeAg, documented transmissions of HBV to 

patients from several HBeAg-negative surgeons (12,15,50) led 

to examination of correlations between HBeAg and HBV viral 

load. Some of these HBeAg-negative persons, despite high rates 

of viral replication, might harbor pre-core mutants of the virus: 

that is, loss of HBeAg expression might result from a single 

nucleotide substitution that results in a stop codon preventing 

transcription (51,52). Persons with such HBV strains who test 

HBeAg-negative might nonetheless be infectious (despite the 

mutation) and even have a high concentration of virions in 

their blood. 

Recent guidelines from other bodies (Table 2) have 

recommended using HBV DNA serum levels in preference 

to HBeAg in determining infectivity. Several studies have 

documented numerous HBeAg-negative persons who have high 

circulating levels of HBV DNA, i.e., viral loads often 105 IU/

ml or more by various commercial assays: 78 HBeAg-negative 

Australian patients with median HBV DNA of 38,000 IU/

ml (determined by the Siemens Versant HBV DNA 3.0 assay) 

(53); 48 HBeAg-negative Greek patients with a median HBV 

DNA of 76,000 IU/ml (by Roche Amplicor HBV-Monitor) 

(54); 165 HBeAg-negative Korean patients with a mean HBV 

DNA of 155,000 IU/ml (by Roche COBAS TaqMan) (55); 

and 47 HBeAg-negative Chinese patients with median HBV 

DNA blood levels of 960,000 copies/ml (about 200,000 IU/

ml) (by PG Biotech [Shenzhan, China] PCR) (56). On the 

basis of these data, monitoring quantitative HBV DNA levels 

provides better information to serve as a predictive indicator of 

infectivity than is provided by monitoring HBeAg status alone. 


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / July 6, 2012 / Vol. 61 / No. 3 

7

Specifying Exposure-Prone Procedures 

In general, three conditions are necessary for health-care 

personnel to pose a risk for bloodborne virus transmission to 

patients. First, the health-care provider must be sufficiently 

viremic (i.e., have infectious virus circulating in the 

bloodstream). Second, the health-care provider must have an 

injury (e.g., a puncture wound) or a condition (e.g., nonintact 

skin) that allows exposure to his/her blood or other infectious 

body fluids. Third, the provider’s blood or infectious body 

fluid must come in direct contact with a patient’s wound, 

traumatized tissue, mucous membranes, or similar portal of 

entry during an exposure-prone procedure. The vast majority 

of HBV-infected health-care personnel pose no risk for patients 

because they do not perform activities in which both the second 

and third conditions are met. 

Beyond meeting these three basic conditions, defining 

exposure-prone invasive procedures that pose a risk for HBV 

transmission between infected provider and patient has been 

problematic in the development of all recommendations and 

guidelines; this process is made especially difficult by varying 

surgical techniques used by health-care providers doing the 

same procedure. More recent guidelines and published articles 

indicate that exposure-prone procedures can be defined 

broadly, and lists of potentially exposure-prone procedures have 

been developed (28,31,60). Principles cited are that exposure-

prone procedures include those in which access for surgery is 

difficult (28) or those in which needlestick injuries are likely to 

occur (60), typically in very closed and unvisualized operating 

spaces in which double gloving and the skin integrity of the 

operator might be compromised (Box). 

Defining exposure-prone procedures in dentistry and 

oral surgery has been particularly difficult. Many intra-oral 

procedures (e.g., injection or scaling) occur in a confined 

cavity and might lead to injuries to the operator (61), so some 

institutions have considered these procedures to be exposure-

prone. However, no transmission of HBV from a U.S. dentist 

to a patient has been reported since 1987, and no transmission 

has ever been reported from a dental or medical student. Thus, 

Category I Procedures (Box) include only major oral surgery, 

and do not include the procedures that medical and dental 

students or most dentists would be performing or assisting. 

In addition to these lists of specific procedures, an 

institutional expert review panel convened to oversee an HBV-

infected surgeon or other health-care provider performing 

exposure-prone procedures may consult the classification 

of such procedures (Box) for guidance. Given the variety 

of procedures, practices, and providers, each HBV-infected 

health-care provider performing potentially exposure-prone 

procedures will need individual consideration. However, this 

Assessing a Safe Level of HBV DNA 

Review of information concerning six HBeAg-negative 

surgeons who had transmitted hepatitis B to patients and 

whose HBV DNA had been determined (using both Chiron 

Quantiplex Branched DNA assay and Roche Amplicor 

HBV DNA Monitor assay) showed the lowest value (at 

one laboratory) in one surgeon to be 40,000 copies/ml 

(approximately 8,000 IU/ml) (9). However, because this 

quantification was performed more than 3 months after the 

transmission had taken place, correlative relevance is uncertain. 

In 2003, recommendations from the Netherlands set the level 

above which health-care providers should not be performing 

exposure prone procedures at HBV DNA levels 105 GE/ml 

or above (approximately 20,000 IU/ml). A larger European 

consortium set this restriction at HBV DNA levels ≥104 

GE/ml (approximately 2,000 IU/ml) (33) for persons who 

are HBeAg-negative. In 2010, this latter threshold, without a 

requirement for e-antigen negativity, was adopted in the U.S. 

SHEA Guidelines (28). U.K. guidelines for HBV-infected 

providers who are HBeAg-negative require these providers to 

achieve or maintain HBV DNA levels of &lt;103 GE/ml (less 

than approximately 200 IU/ml) (31,57). 

Although newer assays such as real-time polymerase chain 

reaction (PCR) tests are expected to reduce the level of detection 

for HBV DNA to 10–20 IU/ml, this level could be undetectable 

in some assays in use in the United States. The lower limit 

of detection for four assays currently in use are 200 IU/ml 

(qualitative assay); 30–350 IU/ml (branched DNA assay); 30 IU/

ml (real-time PCR assay); and 10 IU/ml (real-time PCR assay). 

Thus, any requirement for demonstration of a viral load &lt;200 

IU/ml will need to specify the use of an assay (usually real-time 

PCR) that can detect loads well below that threshold. 

Fluctuating HBV DNA Levels 

Persons who achieve and maintain HBV DNA blood concentrations 

below some designated threshold level or attain an undetectable level 

might have HBV DNA that is transiently elevated and detectable 

but not necessarily transmissible. Such instances might represent 

infrequent detections of virus at very low levels despite long-term 

suppression of virus on therapy (58) but also could represent, especially 

for persons taking older therapies, breakthrough of antiviral-drug 

resistant HBV (59). As assays become increasingly sensitive (newer 

ones can detect circulating HBV DNA down to 20–30 IU/ml), such 

transient elevations will be recognized increasingly and will trigger 

more frequent follow-up. If such an elevation in detectable HBV 

DNA represents not spontaneous fluctuation (sometimes referred 

to as a blip) but rather therapeutic drug failure (i.e., breakthrough), 

then appropriate change in therapy may be considered. 


Recommendations and Reports

8 

MMWR / July 6, 2012 / Vol. 61 / No. 3

evaluation should not define exposure-prone procedures too 

broadly; the great majority of surgical and dental procedures 

have not been associated with the transmission of HBV. 

Notification of Patients of HBV-Infected 

Health-Care Providers 

There is no clear justification for or benefit from routine 

notification of the HBV infection status of a health-care provider 

to his or her patient with the exception of instances in which 

an infected provider transmits HBV to one or more patients or 

documented instances in which a provider exposes a patient to a 

bloodborne infection. Routine mandatory disclosure might actually 

be counterproductive to public health, as providers and students 

might perceive that a positive test would lead to loss of practice 

or educational opportunities. This misperception might lead to 

avoidance of HBV testing, of hepatitis B vaccination (if susceptible), 

of treatment and management (if infected), or of compliance with 

practice oversight from an expert panel (if infected and practicing 

exposure-prone procedures). In general, a requirement for disclosure 

is accepted to be an insurmountable barrier to practice and might 

limit patient and community access to quality medical care. 

Ethical Considerations 

On July 18, 2011, the Consult Subcommittee of CDC’s 

Public Health Ethics Committee reviewed these proposed 

recommendations. The reviewing team also included three 

external ethicists. The opinion of the Consult Subcommittee 

was that guidelines that allow providers with HBV to practice 

while requiring those doing exposure-prone procedures to 

be monitored to maintain low load strikes the right balance 

between protecting patients’ interests and providers’ rights. 

The Consult Subcommittee also noted that providers have an 

ethical and professional obligation to know their HBV status 

and to act on such knowledge accordingly (CDC Public Health 

Ethics Committee, personal communication, 2011). The 

Consult Subcommittee supported the new recommendation 

that mandatory disclosure of provider HBV status to patients 

was no longer warranted and that the 1991 recommendation 

for disclosure was discriminatory and unwarranted. 

In addition, the Consult Subcommittee determined that 

there was no scientific or ethical basis for the restrictions that 

some medical and dental schools have placed on HBV-infected 

students and concluded that such restrictions were detrimental 

to the professions as well as to the individual students. 

BOX. CDC classification of exposure-prone patient care procedures

Category I. Procedures known or likely to pose an 

Category II. All other invasive and noninvasive procedures

increased risk of percutaneous injury to a health-care 

These and similar procedures are not included in Category I as 

provider that have resulted in provider-to-patient 

they pose low or no risk for percutaneous injury to a health-care 

transmission of hepatitis B virus (HBV)

provider or, if a percutaneous injury occurs, it usually happens 

These procedures are limited to major abdominal, cardiothoracic, 

outside a patient’s body and generally does not pose a risk for 

and orthopedic surgery, repair of major traumatic injuries, 

provider-to-patient blood exposure. These include

abdominal and vaginal hysterectomy, caesarean section, vaginal 

•	 surgical and obstetrical/gynecologic procedures that do 

deliveries, and major oral or maxillofacial surgery (e.g., fracture 

not involve the techniques listed for Category I;

reductions). Techniques that have been demonstrated to increase 

•	 the use of needles or other sharp devices when the health-care 

the risk for health-care provider percutaneous injury and provider-

provider’s hands are outside a body cavity (e.g., phlebotomy, 

to-patient blood exposure include

placing and maintaining peripheral and central intravascular 

•	 digital palpation of a needle tip in a body cavity and/or

lines, administering medication by injection, performing 

•	 the simultaneous presence of a health care provider’s 

needle biopsies, or lumbar puncture);

fingers and a needle or other sharp instrument or object 

•	 dental procedures other than major oral or maxillofacial 

(e.g., bone spicule) in a poorly visualized or highly 

surgery;

confined anatomic site.

•	 insertion of tubes (e.g., nasogastric, endotracheal, rectal, or 

Category I procedures, especially those that have been 

urinary catheters);

implicated in HBV transmission, are not ordinarily 

•	 endoscopic or bronchoscopic procedures;

performed by students fulfilling the essential functions of a 

•	 internal examination with a gloved hand that does not 

medical or dental school education.

involve the use of sharp devices (e.g., vaginal, oral, and 

rectal examination; and

•	 procedures that involve external physical touch (e.g., general 

physical or eye examinations or blood pressure checks).


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / July 6, 2012 / Vol. 61 / No. 3 

9

Guidance for Expert Review 

Panels at Institutions 

HBV infection in health-care providers and students who 

do not perform invasive exposure-prone procedures should 

be managed as a personal health issue and does not require 

special panel oversight. However, for providers who perform 

exposure-prone procedures, all recent guidelines advocate the 

constitution of an expert panel to provide oversight of the 

infected health-care provider’s practice (Table 2). 

For HBV-infected providers performing exposure-prone 

procedures, expert review panels should evaluate the infected 

provider’s clinical and viral burden status; assess his or 

her practices, procedures and techniques, experience, and 

adherence to recommended surgical and dental technique; 

provide recommendations, counseling, and oversight of the 

provider’s continued practice or study within the institution; and 

investigate and notify appropriate persons and authorities (e.g., 

risk management or, if need be, licensure boards) for suspected 

and documented breaches (62) in procedure or incidents 

resulting in patient exposure. The panel should reinforce the 

need for Standard Precautions (e.g., double gloving, regular 

glove changes, and use of blunt surgical needles). Panels may 

appropriately provide counseling about alternate procedures 

or specialty paths, especially for providers, students, residents, 

and others early in their careers, as long as this is not coercion 

or limitation (perceived or actual) of the provider or student. 

The members of the expert review panel may be selected 

from, but should not necessarily be limited to, the following: 

one or more persons with expertise in the provider’s specialty; 

infectious disease and hospital epidemiology specialists; liver 

disease specialists (gastroenterologists); the infected providers’ 

occupational health, student health, or primary care physicians; 

ethicists; human resource professionals; hospital or school 

administrators; and legal counsel. Certain members of the 

panel should be familiar with issues relating to bloodborne 

pathogens and their infectivity. 

In instances when it is generally accepted (or thought) 

that a patient might have been exposed to the blood of an 

infected health-care provider, institutions should have in 

place a protocol for communicating to the patient that such 

an exposure might have occurred. The patient should receive 

appropriate follow-up including post-exposure vaccination or 

receipt of hepatitis B immune globulin and testing (i.e., similar 

to the reverse situation of prophylaxis for providers exposed to 

the blood of an HBV-infected patient). 

The confidentiality of the infected provider or student 

should be respected. Certain expert review panels might elect 

to consider cases without knowledge of the name of the infected 

provider or student. However, awareness of the infected 

provider’s or student’s identity might be unavoidable. In such 

cases, respect for the confidentiality of the person under review 

should be accorded as it is for any other patient. 

Recommendations for Chronically 

HBV-Infected Health-Care Providers 

and Students 

CDC recommends the following measures for the management 

of hepatitis B virus–infected health-care providers and students: 

Practice Scope 

•	 Chronic HBV infection in itself should not preclude the 

practice or study of medicine, surgery, dentistry, or allied 

health professions. Standard Precautions should be adhered 

to rigorously in all health-care settings for the protection 

of both patient and provider. 

•	 CDC discourages constraints that restrict chronically HBV-

infected health-care providers and students from the practice 

or study of medicine, dentistry, or surgery, such as 

 – repeated demonstration of persistently nondetectable 

viral loads on a greater than semiannual frequency; 

 – prenotification of patients of the HBV-infection status 

of their care giver; 

 – mandatory antiviral therapy with no other option such 

as maintenance of low viral load without therapy; and

 – forced change of practice, arbitrary exclusion from 

exposure-prone procedures, or any other restriction 

that essentially prohibits the health-care provider from 

practice or the student from study. 

Hepatitis B Vaccination and Screening 

•	 All health-care providers and students should receive hepatitis B 

vaccine according to current CDC recommendations 

(37,45,63). Vaccination (3-dose series) should be followed by 

assessment of hepatitis B surface antibody to determine 

vaccination immunogenicity and, if necessary, revaccination. 

Health-care providers who do not have protective concentration 

of anti-HBs (&gt;10 mIU/ml) after revaccination (i.e., after 

receiving a total of 6 doses) should be tested for HBsAg and 

anti-HBc to determine their infection status (37). 

•	 Prevaccination serologic testing is not indicated for most 

persons being vaccinated, except for those providers and 

students at increased risk for HBV infection (37), such as 

those born to mothers in or from endemic countries and 

sexually active men who have sex with men (64). 


Recommendations and Reports

10 

MMWR / July 6, 2012 / Vol. 61 / No. 3

•	 Providers who are performing exposure-prone procedures 

also should receive prevaccination testing for chronic HBV 

infection. Exposure of a patient to the blood of an 

HBV-infected health-care provider, in the performance of 

any procedure, should be handled with postexposure 

prophylaxis and testing of the patient in a manner similar 

to the reverse situation (i.e., prophylaxis for providers 

exposed to the blood of an HBV-infected patient) (65).

 Expert Panel Oversight Not Needed 

•	 Providers, residents, and medical and dental students with 

active HBV infection (i.e., those who are HBsAg-positive) 

who do not perform exposure-prone procedures but who 

practice non- or minimally invasive procedures (Category 

II, Box) should not be subject to any restrictions of their 

activities or study. They do not need to achieve low or 

undetectable levels of circulating HBV DNA, hepatitis 

e-antigen negativity, or have review and oversight by an 

expert review panel, as recommended for those performing 

exposure-prone procedures. However, they should receive 

medical care for their condition by clinicians, which might 

be in the setting of student or occupational health. 

Expert Panel Oversight Recommended 

•	 Surgeons, including oral surgeons, obstetrician/gynecologists, 

surgical residents, and others who perform exposure-prone 

procedures, i.e., those listed under Category I activities 

(Box), should fulfill the following criteria: 

 – Consonant with the 1991 recommendations and 

Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) 

recommendations (37), their procedures should be 

guided by review of a duly constituted expert review 

panel with a balanced perspective (i.e., providers’ and 

students’ personal, occupational or student health 

physicians, infectious disease specialists, epidemiologists, 

ethicists and others as indicated above) regarding the 

procedures that they can perform and prospective 

oversight of their practice (28). Confidentiality of the 

health-care provider’s or student’s HBV serologic status 

should be maintained. 

 – HBV-infected providers can conduct exposure-prone 

procedures if a low or undetectable HBV viral load is 

documented by regular testing at least every 6 months 

unless higher levels require more frequent testing; for 

example, as drug therapy is added or modified or testing 

is repeated to determine if elevations above a threshold 

are transient. 

 – CDC recommends that an HBV level 1,000 IU/ml 

(5,000 GE/ml) or its equivalent is an appropriate 

threshold for a review panel to adopt. Monitoring should 

be conducted with an assay that can detect as low as 

10–30 IU/ml, especially if the individual institutional 

expert review panel wishes to adopt a lower threshold. 

 – Spontaneous fluctuations (blips) of HBV DNA levels 

and treatment failures might both present as higher-than-

threshold (1,000 IU/ml; 5,000 GE/ml) values. This will 

require the HBV-infected provider to abstain from 

performing exposure-prone procedures, while subsequent 

retesting occurs, and if needed, modifications or 

additions to the health-care provider’s drug therapy and 

other reasonable steps are taken. 

Institutional Policies and Procedures 

•	 Hospitals, medical and dental schools, and other institutions 

should have written policies and procedures for the 

identification and management of HBV-infected health-care 

providers, students, and school applicants. These policies 

should include the ability to identify and convene an expert 

review panel (see Guidance for Expert Review Panels) aware 

of these and other relevant guidelines and recommendations 

before considering the management of HBV-infected 

providers performing exposure-prone procedures.  

Acknowledgments 

The following persons were consulted in the drafting of these 

recommendations: Ronald Bayer, PhD, Columbia University; Kathy 

Kinlaw, MDiv, Emory University; Bernard Lo, MD, University of 

California at San Francisco; David K. Henderson, MD, National 

Institutes of Health Clinical Center; Disability Rights Section, Civil 

Rights Division, U.S. Department of Justice; David Thomas, MD, 

Infectious Diseases Society of America; Anna S. F. Lok, MD, American 

Association for the Study of Liver Disease; Joan M. Block, Hepatitis B 

Foundation; Su H. Wang, MD, Charles B. Wang Community Health 

Center; Samuel So, MD, Asian Liver Center/Stanford University; Gabriel 

Garcia, MD, American Association of American Medical Colleges; 

Kathleen T. O’Laughlin, DMD, American Dental Association; Stephen 

C. Shannon, DO, American Association of Colleges of Osteopathic 

Medicine; Anne Wells, EdD, American Dental Education Association; 

Therese M. Long, MBA, Organization for Safety, Asepsis and Prevention; 

Alfred DeMaria Jr, MD, Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists; 

Mark Russi, MD, American College of Occupational and Environmental 

Medicine; Harold W. Jaffe, MD, Office of the Director, Drue H. Barrett, 

PhD, Leonard Ortman, PhD, Public Health Ethics Unit, Office of 

the Director, Trudy K. Murphy, MD, Division of Viral Hepatitis, 

National Center for HIV, Viral Hepatitis, STDs and TB Prevention, 

Denise Cardo, MD, David T. Kuhar, MD, Division of Health Quality 

Promotion, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious 

Diseases, Amy S. Collins, MPH, Barbara F. Gooch, DMD, Division 

of Oral Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and 

Health Promotion, CDC. 


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / July 6, 2012 / Vol. 61 / No. 3 

11

References 

 1. CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human 

immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during 

exposure-prone invasive procedures. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8). 

 2. CDC. Public Health Service inter-agency guidelines for screening donors 

of blood, plasma, organs, tissues, and semen for evidence. MMWR 1991; 

40(No. RR-4):1–17. 

 3. CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health-

care settings. MMWR 1987;36(Suppl 2S). 

 4. CDC. Universal precautions for prevention of transmission of human 

immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne 

pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;37:377–88. 

 5. Lohr KN. Rating the strength of scientific evidence: relevance for quality 

improvement programs. Intl J Qual Health Care 2004;16:9–18. 

 6. Perz JF, Thompson ND, Shaefer MK, Patel PR. US outbreak 

investigations highlight the need for safe injection practices and basic 

infection control. Clin Liver Dis 2010;14:137–51. 

 7. Redd JT, Baumbach J, Kohn W, Nainan O, Khristova M, Williams I. 

Patient-to-patient transmission of hepatitis B virus associated with oral 

surgery. J Infect Dis 2007;195:1311–4. 

 8. Bell DM, Shapiro CN, Ciesielski CA, et al. Preventing bloodborne 

pathogen transmission from health-care workers to patients: the CDC 

perspective. Surg Clin North Am 1995;75:1189–203. 

 9. Corden S, Ballard AJ, Ijaz S, et al. HBV DNA levels and transmission 

of hepatitis B by health care workers. J Clin Virol 2003;27:52–8. 

 10. Enfield KB, Sharapov U, Hall K, et al. Transmission of hepatitis B virus 

to patients from an orthopedic surgeon [Abstr no. 420]. Presented at 

the 5th Decennial International Conference on Healthcare-Associated 

Infections, Atlanta, Georgia; March 18–20, 2010. Available at http://

shea.confex.com/shea/2010/webprogram/Paper2428.html. Accessed 

May 8, 2012.

 11. Harpaz R, von Seidlin L, Averhoff AM, et al. Transmission of hepatitis B 

virus to multiple patients from a surgeon without evidence of inadequate 

infection control. N Engl J Med 1996;334:549–54. 

 12. Ngui SL, Watkins RPF, Heptonstall J, Teo CG. Selective transmission of 

hepatitis B after percutaneous exposure. J Infect Dis 2000;181:838–43. 

 13. The Incident Investigation Teams and Others. Transmission of hepatitis 

to patients from four infected surgeons without hepatitis B e antigen. 

N Engl J Med 1997;336:178–84. 

 14. Molyneaux P, Reid TM, Collacott I, Mcintyre PG, Dillon JF, Laing RB. 

Acute hepatitis B in two patients transmitted from an e antigen negative 

cardiothoracic surgeon. Commun Dis Publ Health 2000;3:250–2. 

 15. Spijkerman IJ, van Doorn LJ, Janssen MH, et al. Transmission of hepatitis 

B virus from a surgeon to his patients during high risk and low risk 

surgical procedures during 4 years. Infect Contr Hosp Epidemiol 

2002;23:306–12. 

 16. Ulrich PP, Ramesh AB, Deto B, Mack D, Sninsky J, Vyas GN. Enzymatic 

amplification of hepatitis B virus DNA in serum compared with 

infectivity testing in chimpanzees. J Infect Dis 1989;160:37–43. 

 17. Asabe S, Wieland SF, Chattopadhyay PK, et al. The size of the viral 

inoculums contributes to the outcome of hepatitis B infection. J Virol 

2009;83:9652–62. 

 18. CDC. Guidelines for infection control in dental health-care 

settings—2003. MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-17). 

 19. Younai FS. Health care-associated transmission of hepatitis B &amp; C viruses 

in dental care (dentistry). Clin Liver Dis 2010;14:93–104. 

 20. US Department of Labor. Occupational health and safety administration. 

29 CFR part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens; 

final rule. Federal Register 1991;56:64004-182. 

 21. Carlson AL, Perl TM. Health care workers as source of hepatitis B and 

C virus transmission. Clin Liver Dis 2010;14:153–68. 

 22. CDC. Viral hepatitis surveillance, United States, 2009. Available at 

http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/Statistics/2009Surveillance/index.htm. 

Accessed May 8, 2012. 

 23. CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating 

transmission in the United States through universal childhood vaccination: 

recommendations of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee 

(ACIP) MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13). 

 24. Williams IT, Perz JF, Bell BP. Viral hepatitis transmission in ambulatory 

care settings. Clin Infect Dis 2004;38:1592–8. 

 25. Hoofnagle JH, Doo E, Liang TJ, Fleischer R, Lok ASF. Management 

of hepatitis B: summary of a clinical research workshop [Review]. 

Hepatol 2007;45:1056–75. 

 26. Ribeiro RM, Germanidis G, Powers KA, et al. Hepatitis B virus kinetics 

under antiviral therapy sheds light on differences in hepatitis B e antigen 

positive and negative infections. J Infect Dis 2010;202:1309–18. 

 27. Leung N, Peng C-Y, Han H-W, et al. Early hepatitis B virus DNA 

reduction in hepatitis B e antigen-positive patients with chronic hepatitis 

B: a randomized international study of entecavir versus adefovir. Hepatol 

2009;49:72–9. 

 28. Henderson DK, Dembry L, Fishman NO, et al. SHEA guideline for 

management of healthcare workers who are infected with hepatitis B 

virus, hepatitis C virus and/or human immunodeficiency virus. Infect 

Control Hosp Epidemiol 2010;31:203–32. 

 29. American College of Surgeons. Statement on the surgeon and hepatitis. 

Available at http://www.facs.org/fellows_info/statements/st-22.html. 

Accessed May 8, 2012. 

 30. Health Canada. Proceedings of the Consensus Conference on Infected 

Health Care Worker Risk for Transmission of Bloodborne Pathogens. 

Can Commun Dis Rep 1998;24(Suppl 4):1–28. Available at http://

www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/publicat/ccdr-rmtc/98vol24/24s4/index.html. 

Accessed May 8, 2012. 

 31. UK Department of Health. Hepatitis B infected health care workers: 

guidance on implementation of Health Service Circular 2000/020. 2007. 

Available at http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_

digitalassets/@dh/@en/documents/digitalasset/dh_4057538.pdf. 

Accessed May 8, 2012. 

 32. UK Department of Health. Health Services Guidelines HSG (93)40. 

Protecting health care workers and patients from hepatitis B. Available at 

http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/@dh/@

en/documents/digitalasset/dh_4088384.pdf. Accessed May 8, 2012. 

 33. Gunson RN, Shouval D, Roggendorf M, et al. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) 

and hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections in health care workers (HCWs): 

guidelines for prevention of transmission of HBV and HCV from HCW 

to patients. J Clin Virol 2003;27:213–30. 

 34. Buster EH, van der Eijk AA, Schalm SW. Doctor to patient transmission 

of hepatitis B virus: implications of HBV DNA levels and potential new 

solutions. Antiviral Res 2003;60:79–85. 

 35. Van der Eijk AA, de Man RA, Niesters HG, Schalm SW, Zaaijer HL. 

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA levels and the management of HBV-

infected health care providers. J Viral Hepatitis 2006;13:2–4. 

 36. FitzSimmons D, Francois G, De Carli G, et al. Hepatitis B virus, hepatitis 

C virus and other blood-borne infections in healthcare providers: 

guidelines for prevention and management in industrialized countries. 

Occup Environ Med 2008;65:446–51. 

 37. CDC. Immunization of health-care personnel: recommendations of the 

Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2011; 

60(No. RR-7). 

 38. Garner JS. Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals. The Hospital 

Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Infect Control Hosp 

Epidemiol 1996;17:53. 

 39. Mahoney FJ, Stewart K, Hu HX, Coleman P, Alter MJ. Progress toward 

the elimination of hepatitis B virus transmission among health care 

workers in the United States. Arch Intern Med 1997;157:2601–5. 

 40. Haiduven DJ, DeMaio TM, Stevens DA. A five-year study of needlestick 

injuries: significant reduction associated with communication, education, 

and convenient placement of sharps containers. Infect Control Hosp 

Epidemiol 1992;13:265–71. 


Recommendations and Reports

12 

MMWR / July 6, 2012 / Vol. 61 / No. 3

 41. Wong ES, Stoda JL, Chinchilli VM, Williams DS, Stuart G, Markowitz SM. 

Are universal precautions effective in reducing the number of occupational 

exposures among health care workers? JAMA 1991;265:1123–8. 

 42. Fahey BJ, Koziol DE, Banks SM, Henderson DK. Frequency of 

nonparenteral occupational exposure to blood and body fluids before 

and after universal precautions training. Am J Med 1991;90:145–53. 

 43. Beekman SE, Vlahov D, McShalley ED, Schmitt JM. Temporal 

association between implementation of universal precautions and a 

sustained progressive decrease in percutaneous exposures to blood. Clin 

Infect Dis 1994;18:562–9. 

 44. Beltrami EM, Williams IT, Shapiro CN, Chamberland ME. Risk and 

management of blood-borne infections in health care workers. Clin 

Microbiol Rev 2000;13:385–407. 

 45. CDC. A comprehensive immunization strategy to eliminate transmission 

of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: recommendations of 

the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Part II: 

immunization of adults. MMWR 2006;55(No. RR-16). 

 46. Association of American Medical Colleges. America needs a more diverse 

physician workforce. Available at https://www.aamc.org/download/87306/

data/physiciandiversityfacts.pdf. Accessed May 8, 2012. 

 47. American Dental Association. 2009–10 survey of dental education: 

academic programs, enrollment, and graduates. Available at http://www.

ada.org/sections/professionalResources/pdfs/survey_ed_vol1.pdf. 

Accessed May 8, 2012. 

 48. Fredekind RE, Cuny EJ, Peltier B, Carpenter WM. The hepatitis B e-antigen 

positive dental school applicant. J Dental Educ 1999;63:766–71. 

 49. Luu NS. Dental students with hepatitis B: issues to be considered when 

defining policies. J Dental Educ 2004;68:306–15. 

 50. Sundkvist T, Hamilton GR, Rimmer D, Evans BG, Teo CG. Fatal 

outcome of transmission of hepatitis B from an e antigen negative 

surgeon. Commun Dis Public Health 1998;1:48–50. 

 51. Carman WF, Jacyna MR, Hadziyannis S, McGarvey S, Makris A, Thomas 

HC. Mutation preventing formation of hepatitis e antigen in patients 

with chronic hepatitis B infection. Lancet 1989;2:588–91. 

 52. Brunetto MR, Giarin MM, Olivieri F, et al. Wild type and e antigen-

minus hepatitis B viruses and course of chronic hepatitis. Proc Natl Acad 

Sci USA 1991;88:4186–90. 

 53. Thompson AJV, Nguyen T, Iser D, et al. Serum hepatitis B surface antigen 

and hepatitis B e antigen titers: disease phase influences correlation with 

viral load and intrahepatic hepatitis B virus markers. Hepatol 2010; 

51:1933–44. 

 54. Zacharakis G, Koskinas J, Kotsiou S, et al. The role of serial measurement 

of serum HBV DNA levels in patients with chronic HBeAg(-) hepatitis 

B infection: association with liver disease progression: a prospective cohort 

study. J Hepatol 2008;49:884–91. 

 55. Kim YJ, Cho HC, Choi MS, et al. The change of the quantitative HBsAg 

level during the natural course of chronic hepatitis B. Liver International 

2011;31:819–25. 

 56. Peng G, Luo B, Lie J, et al. HepatitisB e-antigen persistency is associated 

with the properties of HBV-specific CD8 T cells in CHB patients. J 

Clin Immunol 2011;31:195–204. 

 57. UK Department of Health. Hepatitis B infected healthcare workers and 

antiviral therapy. Available at http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/

groups/dh_digitalassets/documents/digitalasset/dh_073133.pdf. 

Accessed May 8, 2012. 

 58. Lampertico P, Viganò M, Soffredini R, et al. Maintained long-term suppression 

of HBV replication in NUC-naïve patients with chronic hepatitis B treated 

with EBV monotherapy infield practice: the Italian multicenter experience 

[Abstract no. 391]. Hepatol 2010;42(4 Suppl):514–5A. 

 59. Stornaiuolo G, Stanzione M, Brancaccio G, et al. Viral blips during long-

term treatment with standard or double dose lamivudine in HBe antigen 

negative chronic hepatitis B. World J Gastroenterol 2007;13:5642–7. 

 60. Reitsma AM, Closen ML, Cunningham M, et al. Infected physicians 

and invasive procedures: safe practice management. Clin Infect Dis 

2005;40:1665–8; 41:136 [Erratum].

 61. Cleveland JL, Barker LK, Cuny EJ, Panlilio AL, National Surveillance System 

for Health Care Workers Group. Preventing percutaneous injuries among 

dental health care personnel. J Am Dental Assoc 2007;138:169–78. 

 62. CDC. Steps for evaluating an infection control breach. Available at 

http://www.cdc.gov/HAI/surveillance/steps_for_eval_IC_breach.html. 

Accessed May 8, 2012. 

 63. CDC. Recommended adult immunization schedule—United States. 

MMWR 2012;61(4):1–4. 

 64. CDC. Recommendations for identification and public health management of 

persons with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. MMWR 2008;57(No. RR-8). 

 65. CDC. Updated U.S. Public Health Service guidelines for the management 

of occupational exposures to HBV, HCV, and HIV and recommendations 

for postexposure prophylaxis. MMWR 2001;50(No. RR-11). 



U.S. Government Printing Office: 2012-523-218/73628 Region IV ISSN: 1057-5987

The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free of 

charge in electronic format. To receive an electronic copy each week, visit MMWR’s free subscription page at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/mmwrsubscribe.

html. Paper copy subscriptions are available through the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402; 

telephone 202-512-1800.

Address all inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for publication, to Editor, MMWR Series, Mailstop E-90, CDC, 1600 

Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30333 or to mmwrq@cdc.gov. 

All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated.

Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations 

or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses 

listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication.

