
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report

Recommendations and Reports / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

January 12, 2018 

Prevention of Hepatitis B Virus Infection in the 

United States: Recommendations of the Advisory 

Committee on Immunization Practices


Recommendations and Reports

The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.

Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Title]. MMWR Recomm Rep 2018;67(No. RR-#):[inclusive page numbers].

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Brenda Fitzgerald, MD, Director 

William R. Mac Kenzie, MD, Acting Associate Director for Science 

Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 

Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services

Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 

MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Serials)

Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, MS, Editor-in-Chief

Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Executive Editor 

Christine G. Casey, MD, Editor

Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor

David C. Johnson, Lead Technical Writer-Editor

Jeffrey D. Sokolow, MA, Project Editor

Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist

Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 

Stephen R. Spriggs, Tong Yang,

Visual Information Specialists

Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, 

Paul D. Maitland, Terraye M. Starr, Moua Yang,

Information Technology Specialists

MMWR Editorial Board

Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman

Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH

Virginia A. Caine, MD 

Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD

Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA

David W. Fleming, MD 

William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH

King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 

Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 

Rima F. Khabbaz, MD

Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN

Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA

Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD

Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 

Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 

Carlos Roig, MS, MA

William L. Roper, MD, MPH 

William Schaffner, MD

CONTENTS

Introduction ............................................................................................................1

New or Updated Recommendations .............................................................1

Methods ....................................................................................................................2

HBV Background ....................................................................................................3

Prophylaxis Against HBV Infection ..................................................................9

Recommendations ............................................................................................. 13

Future Directions ................................................................................................ 25

Acknowledgments ............................................................................................. 25

References ............................................................................................................. 25

Disclosure of Relationships

The 2016–2017 ACIP Hepatitis Vaccines Work Group 

members wish to disclose that they have no financial or 

competing interests with the manufacturers of commercial 

products or suppliers of commercial services related to 

hepatitis B (HepB) vaccines. Content will not include any 

discussion of the unlabeled use of a product or a product under 

investigational use, with the following exceptions:

• use of Pediarix vaccine for infants born to hepatitis B 

surface antigen (HBsAg)–positive mothers or mothers 

with an unknown HBsAg status to complete the vaccine 

series after receipt of a birth dose of single-antigen HepB 

vaccine and hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG);

• alternate 3-dose vaccine administration schedules heeding 

to minimum intervals of 4 weeks between the first and 

second dose, 8 weeks between the second and third dose, 

and 16 weeks between the first and third dose;

• modified dosing regimens (e.g., doubling of standard dose 

and administration of additional doses) in certain 

circumstances (e.g., for persons with immunocompromising 

conditions); and

• antiviral therapy during pregnancy for the prevention of 

perinatal hepatitis B virus (HBV) transmission.


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Prevention of Hepatitis B Virus Infection in the United States: 

Recommendations of the Advisory Committee 

on Immunization Practices

Sarah Schillie, MD1

Claudia Vellozzi, MD1

Arthur Reingold, MD2

Aaron Harris, MD1

Penina Haber, MPH3

John W. Ward, MD1

Noele P. Nelson, MD1

1Division of Viral Hepatitis, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC

2University of California, Berkeley School of Public Health, Berkeley, California

3Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC

Summary

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is transmitted via blood or sexual contact. Persons with chronic HBV infection are at increased risk for 

cirrhosis and liver cancer and require medical care. This report updates and summarizes previously published recommendations 

from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) and CDC regarding the prevention of HBV infection in the 

United States. ACIP recommends testing all pregnant women for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), and testing HBsAg-positive 

pregnant women for hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid (HBV DNA); administration of HepB vaccine and hepatitis B immune 

globulin (HBIG) for infants born to HBV-infected women within 12 hours of birth, followed by completion of the vaccine series and 

postvaccination serologic testing; universal hepatitis B vaccination within 24 hours of birth, followed by completion of the vaccine 

series; and vaccination of children and adolescents aged &lt;19 years who have not been vaccinated previously. ACIP recommends 

vaccination of adults at risk for HBV infection, including universal vaccination of adults in settings in which a high proportion 

have risk factors for HBV infection and vaccination of adults requesting protection from HBV without acknowledgment of a 

specific risk factor. These recommendations also provide CDC guidance for postexposure prophylaxis following occupational and 

other exposures. This report also briefly summarizes previously published American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases 

guidelines for maternal antiviral therapy to reduce perinatal HBV transmission.

Introduction

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is transmitted through percutaneous 

(i.e., puncture through the skin) or mucosal (i.e., direct contact 

with mucous membranes) exposure to infectious blood or 

body fluids. HBV is highly infectious, can be transmitted 

in the absence of visible blood (1,2), and remains viable on 

environmental surfaces for at least seven days (3). Persons 

with chronic infection (e.g., those with persistent hepatitis B 

surface antigen [HBsAg] in the serum for at least 6 months 

following acute infection) serve as the main reservoir for HBV 

transmission (4).

This report summarizes and consolidates previously 

published recommendations from the Advisory Committee 

on Immunization Practices (ACIP) and CDC. It also 

Corresponding author: Sarah Schillie, Division of Viral Hepatitis, 

National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB 

Prevention, CDC. Telephone: 404-718-8608; E-mail: Ggi1@cdc.gov.

contains updates to recommendations for the prevention of 

HBV infection in the United States. A list of frequently used 

abbreviations is provided (Box 1).

New or Updated Recommendations

The following recommendations are new or updated:

• universal hepatitis B (HepB) vaccination within 

24 hours of birth for medically stable infants weighing 

≥2,000 grams;

• testing HBsAg-positive pregnant women for hepatitis B 

virus deoxyribonucleic acid (HBV DNA);

• postvaccination serologic testing for infants whose 

mother’s HBsAg status remains unknown indefinitely (e.g., 

when a parent or person with lawful custody surrenders 

an infant confidentially shortly after birth);

• single-dose revaccination for infants born to HBsAg-

positive women not responding to the initial vaccine series;


Recommendations and Reports

2 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

• vaccination for persons with chronic liver disease (including, 

but not limited to, those with hepatitis C virus [HCV] 

infection, cirrhosis, fatty liver disease, alcoholic liver disease, 

autoimmune hepatitis, and an alanine aminotransferase 

[ALT] or aspartate aminotransferase [AST] level greater than 

twice the upper limit of normal); and

• removal of permissive language for delaying the birth dose 

until after hospital discharge.

This report also briefly summarizes American Association for 

the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) guidelines for maternal 

antiviral therapy to reduce perinatal HBV transmission, 

published previously (5). Recommendations from the 

Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) regarding 

vaccination of the immunocompromised host are published 

separately (6).

Methods

ACIP’s Hepatitis Work Group comprises professionals 

from academic medicine (pediatrics, family medicine, 

internal medicine, infectious disease, occupational health, 

and preventive medicine specialists), federal and state public 

health agencies, and medical societies.* The Work Group 

reviewed epidemiology and literature, directed an economic 

analysis, and deliberated upon recommendations. The 

Work Group considered existing published ACIP and CDC 

vaccine recommendations in summarizing recommendations 

contained herein for the prevention of HBV infection.

This report updates and supplants ACIP recommendations 

for HepB vaccination of children and adults published 

previously (7,8). This report incorporates ACIP and CDC 

recommendations published previously (9–11).

Guidelines from AASLD inform the use of antiviral 

therapy among pregnant women with elevated HBV DNA 

for the purpose of preventing perinatal HBV transmission. 

Surveillance data were obtained from the National Notifiable 

Diseases Surveillance System (NNDSS) (https://wwwn.cdc.

gov/nndss/).

Data informing clarifications to the recommendations were 

summarized on the basis of findings from literature searches 

that were completed on May 11, 2016. Two search terms were 

used to ascertain data regarding maximum number of doses 

for dialysis patients and minimum intervals for dialysis dosing: 

“Hepatitis b vacc* dialysis boost*” and “Dialysis hepatitis b 

vacc* schedule.” Epidemiologic and vaccine coverage data were 

reviewed, as well as publicly available data on the number 

of infant abandonments and safely surrendered infants. The 

literature searches included clinical trials and comparative 

* A list of the members appears on page 30.

BOX 1. Abbreviations used in this report

AASLD  

American Association for the Study of 

Liver Diseases

ACIP  

Advisory Committee on Immunization 

Practices

anti-HBc  

antibody to hepatitis B core antigen

anti-HBe  

antibody to hepatitis B e antigen

anti-HBs  

antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen

HBeAg  

hepatitis B e antigen

HBIG  

hepatitis B immune globulin

HBsAg  

hepatitis B surface antigen

HBV  

hepatitis B virus

HBV DNA 

hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid

HCP  

health care personnel

HCV  

hepatitis C virus

HepB  

hepatitis B 

HIV  

human immunodeficiency virus

IDSA  

Infectious Diseases Society of America

IDU  

Injection-drug use

IgM  

Immunoglobulin class M

IgG  

Immunoglobulin class G

MSM  

men who have sex with men

NNDSS  

National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance 

System

PHBPP  

Perinatal Hepatitis B Prevention Program

PWID  

persons who inject drugs

QALY  

quality-adjusted life-year

STI  

sexually transmitted infection

VAERS  

Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting System

VSD  

Vaccine Safety Datalink

studies conducted worldwide and published in English since 

2000. All studies yielding pertinent information were eligible 

for inclusion. Search results were supplemented by additional 

relevant papers identified by subject matter experts on the 

Work Group. Per the ACIP process, it was predetermined that 

Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and 

Evaluation (GRADE) was not required for these updates of 

existing recommendations.

To assess vaccine safety, the Work Group searched two 

postlicensure surveillance systems for adverse events from 

2005 through 2015: the Vaccine Adverse Events Reporting 

System (VAERS) (https://vaers.hhs.gov) and the Vaccine 

Safety Datalink (VSD) (https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/

ensuringsafety/monitoring/vsd). VAERS is a national passive 

surveillance system, and VSD conducts population-based 

vaccine safety studies. VAERS can generate vaccine safety 

hypotheses but cannot assess causality and is subject to several 

limitations, including reporting biases and inconsistent data 


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

3

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

quality (12,13). VSD can be used to assess hypotheses that 

arise from reviews of medical literature, reports to VAERS, 

changes in immunization schedules, or the introduction of 

new vaccines (14).

During February–September 2016, the Work Group held 

five teleconference meetings. Work Group and ACIP members 

also reviewed and commented on a draft of the statement prior 

to the ACIP’s October 2016 meeting. A summary of Work 

Group discussions was presented to ACIP on October 19, 2016. 

At that time, ACIP members voted to approve a draft HepB 

vaccine recommendations statement, including recommending 

universal HepB vaccination within 24 hours of birth for 

medically stable infants weighing ≥2,000 grams. In January 

2017, the Work Group held a teleconference meeting to review 

results of an economic analysis of single-dose revaccination 

for infants born to HBsAg-positive women. Results from 

that analysis were presented to ACIP on February 22, 2017. 

Recommendations were not evaluated using GRADE, but 

expert opinion was used to shape the recommendations. At 

that time, ACIP members voted to approve language for single-

dose revaccination for infants (regardless of birth weight) born 

to HBsAg-positive women. Modifications were made to the 

ACIP statement during the subsequent review process at CDC 

to update and clarify wording in the report.

HBV Background

Epidemiology

In 2015, a total of 3,370 cases of acute HBV infection 

were reported to CDC. The actual number of acute cases is 

believed to be 6.5 times the number of reported cases in any 

year. It is estimated that 21,900 new cases of HBV occurred 

in 2015 after under-ascertainment and under-reporting were 

considered (4). The rate of reported acute HBV infections 

declined 88.5% since recommendations for HepB vaccination 

were first issued, from 9.6 cases per 100,000 population 

in 1982 to 1.1 cases per 100,000 population in 2015 (15), 

although the rate of acute HBV infections remained fairly 

stable during 2010–2015 (4) (Figure 1). The 2015 incidence 

is greatest for persons aged 30–39 years (2.6 per 100,000 

population). In 2015, persons aged ≤19 years had the lowest 

incidence (0.02 cases per 100,000 population), likely a result 

of routine infant vaccination. Although the incidence of acute 

HBV infection is greater for males than for females, the gap 

has narrowed; in 2015, the rate for males was approximately 

1.6 times higher than that for females (1.3 cases and 0.8 cases 

per 100,000 population, respectively) (4). During 2009–2013, 

the combined incidence of acute HBV infection in three states 

(Kentucky, Tennessee, and West Virginia) increased 114% and 

was associated with increasing injection-drug use (16).

On the basis of national health survey data, it is estimated 

that approximately 850,000 persons are living with HBV 

infection (prevalence) in the United States (17,18). Studies 

based on data from countries of persons migrating to the 

United States and census data indicate that the total prevalence 

of chronic hepatitis B might be as high as 2.2 million persons 

(19), suggesting that the national health survey-based estimate 

might be conservative. Foreign-born persons account for 

approximately 95% of newly reported chronic infections in the 

United States (20); the prevalence of chronic HBV infection 

is approximately 3.5% among foreign-born persons (19), and 

the majority of chronic HBV infections in the United States 

are among Asians/Pacific Islanders.

Strategy to Eliminate HBV

In 1991, the United States adopted a strategy for universal 

HepB vaccination of infants (21). A comprehensive strategy 

to eliminate HBV transmission evolved over the ensuing three 

decades and encompasses 1) routine testing of all pregnant 

women for HBsAg and prophylaxis for infants born to HBsAg-

positive mothers, 2) universal vaccination of infants beginning at 

birth, 3) routine vaccination of previously unvaccinated children 

and adolescents, and 4) vaccination of adults at risk for HBV 

infection (7–11,21–26). Preventing perinatal transmission relies 

upon testing all pregnant women for HBsAg and administering 

timely prophylaxis (HepB vaccine and hepatitis B immune 

globulin [HBIG]) to infants born to infected mothers. Universal 

HepB vaccination of all infants beginning at birth provides a 

critical safeguard and prevents infection among infants born 

to HBsAg-positive mothers not identified prenatally (e.g., in 

situations where the mother was not tested or when testing, 

interpretation, or transcription errors occurred). Vaccination 

of children and adolescents not previously vaccinated and 

vaccination of adults at risk for HBV infection (e.g., by sexual 

or percutaneous exposure and international travelers to certain 

countries) is recommended to prevent HBV transmission outside 

of the perinatal setting (Box 2).

HBV prevention strategies have been implemented 

successfully in the United States, but challenges remain. 

Approximately 88% of commercially insured women and 

84% of Medicaid-enrolled women are tested for HBsAg 

during pregnancy (27). In one study of a large health system 

in northern California, 93% of HBsAg-positive pregnant 

women were tested for HBV DNA (28). Most (94.9%) infants 

born to infected women receive recommended prophylaxis 

within 12 hours of birth (29). Universal HepB vaccine birth 

dose coverage, defined as 1 dose of vaccine administered 


Recommendations and Reports

4 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

FIGURE 1. Incidence of hepatitis B virus infection — National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System, United States, 1980–2015

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Incidence (1,000s)

New Hepatitis B infections

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2010

2012

2014

2006

2008

Years

Vaccine recs were 

frst issued in 1982

by 3 days of life, is 71.1% (30), an increase from 50.1% 

during 2003–2005 prior to revised ACIP recommendations 

for the birth dose before hospital discharge (31), but below 

the Healthy People 2020 target of 85% (32). HepB vaccine 

coverage (≥3 doses) among children aged 19–35 months and 

13–17 years is 90.5% (30) and 91.4% (33), respectively. 

Vaccine coverage (≥3 doses) is lower among adults: 27.4% 

among adults who report chronic liver conditions; 31.6% 

among adults who traveled outside the United States to 

countries other than Europe, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, 

or Canada since 1995; and 24.4% among adults with 

diabetes aged 19–59 years and 12.6% of adults with diabetes 

aged ≥60 years (34). Among health care personnel (HCP), 

≥3-dose coverage was 64.7%, an increase from 51% in 1992 

shortly after implementation of the Needlestick Safety and 

Prevention Act (35), but well below the Healthy People 2020 

target of 90% (32,34).

New strategies for further reducing HBV transmission in 

this report include testing HBsAg-positive pregnant women 

for HBV DNA to identify infants at greatest risk for infection 

and guide the use of maternal antiviral therapy (36,37). 

Published evidence indicates that maternal antiviral therapy 

during pregnancy further reduces perinatal HBV transmission; 

hence, AASLD suggests antiviral therapy when maternal HBV 

DNA is &gt;200,000 IU/mL (5,38,39).

Virus Description and Transmission

HBV is a 40–42-nm enveloped virus classified in the 

Hepadnaviridae family. HBV contains a circular, partially 

double-stranded DNA genome that is 3.2 kb in length. After 

a susceptible person is exposed, the virus enters the liver 

via the bloodstream. The liver is the primary site of HBV 

replication (40–43).

HBV has been classified by two separate systems: serologic 

subtype and genotype. Nine serologic subtypes initially were 

described based on the heterogeneity of HBsAg: adrq+, adrq–, 

ayr, ayw1, ayw2, ayw3, ayw4, adw2, and adw4 (44,45). Ten 


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

5

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

HBV genotypes, designated A–J, have been described. HBV 

serotypes and genotypes vary geographically. Infection or 

immunization with one genotype generally confers immunity 

to all genotypes (7,44,46,47).

HBV is highly infectious, can be transmitted in the absence 

of visible blood (22), and remains infectious on environmental 

surfaces for at least 7 days (2,3). All HBsAg-positive persons are 

infectious, but those with elevated HBV DNA or those with 

hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg), a protein from the hepatitis B 

virus that circulates in the blood and is a marker of infectivity, 

are most infectious. Persons with occult HBV infection (i.e., 

those who test negative for HBsAg but have detectable HBV 

DNA) also might transmit infection (48).

HBV is transmitted through percutaneous, mucosal, 

or nonintact skin exposure to infectious blood or body 

fluids. HBV is concentrated most highly in blood, and 

percutaneous exposure is an efficient mode of transmission. 

Semen and vaginal secretions are infectious, and HBV also 

can be detected in saliva, tears, and bile. Cerebrospinal fluid, 

synovial fluid, pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, pericardial fluid, 

and amniotic fluid are also considered potentially infectious. 

Urine, feces, vomitus, nasopharyngeal washings, sputum, 

and sweat are not efficient vehicles of transmission unless 

they contain blood because they contain low quantities of 

infectious HBV. HBsAg found in breast milk is also unlikely 

to lead to transmission, and hence HBV infection is not a 

contraindication to breastfeeding (2,7,22).

Among adults, HBV is transmitted primarily by percutaneous 

exposure to blood (e.g., by injection-drug use) and sexual 

contact. HBV is transmitted efficiently by sexual contact 

both among heterosexuals and among men who have sex 

with men (MSM). Risk factors for sexual transmission among 

heterosexuals include having unprotected sex with an infected 

partner, having unprotected sex with more than one partner, 

and a history of another sexually transmitted infection (STI). 

Risk factors associated with sexual transmission among MSM 

include having multiple sex partners, history of another 

STI, and anal intercourse. Transmission can occur from 

interpersonal contact (e.g., sharing a toothbrush or razor, 

contact with exudates from dermatologic lesions, or contact 

with HBsAg-contaminated surfaces) and in settings such as 

schools, child care centers, and facilities for developmentally 

disabled persons. Transmission of HBV from transfusion of 

blood or blood products is rare because of donor screening 

and viral inactivation procedures. Other possible sources of 

infection include contaminated medical or dental instruments, 

unsafe injections, needle-stick injuries, organ transplantation, 

and dialysis (49).

BOX 2. Strategy to eliminate HBV transmission in the United States*

• Screening of all pregnant women for HBsAg

 – HBV DNA testing for HBsAg-positive pregnant 

women, with suggestion of maternal antiviral 

therapy to reduce perinatal transmission when 

HBV DNA is &gt;200,000 IU/mL

 – Prophylaxis (HepB vaccine and HBIG) for infants 

born to HBsAg-positive† women

• Universal vaccination of all infants beginning at 

birth§,¶ as a safeguard for infants born to HBV-

infected mothers not identified prenatally

• Routine vaccination of previously unvaccinated 

children aged &lt;19 years

• Vaccination of adults at risk for HBV infection, 

including those requesting protection from HBV 

without acknowledgment of a specific risk factor

* Sources: Mast EE, Margolis HS, Fiore AE, et al. A comprehensive 

immunization strategy to eliminate transmission of hepatitis B virus 

infection in the United States: recommendations of the Advisory 

Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). Part 1: immunization of 

infants, children, and adolescents. MMWR Recomm Rep 2005;54(No. 

RR-16):1–31; Mast EE, Weinbaum CM, Fiore AE, et al. A comprehensive 

immunization strategy to eliminate transmission of hepatitis B virus 

infection in the United States: recommendations of the Advisory 

Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). Part II: immunization 

of adults. MMWR Recomm Rep 2006;55(No. RR-16):1–33.

† Refer to Table 3 for prophylaxis recommendations for infants born to 

women with unknown HBsAg status.

§ Within 24 hours of birth for medically stable infants weighing ≥2,000 grams.

¶ Refer to Table 3 for birth dose recommendations for infants weighing 

&lt;2,000 grams.

Clinical Features and Natural History

Clinical manifestations of HBV infection range from 

asymptomatic infection to fulminant hepatitis. The average 

incubation period is 60 days (range: 40–90 days) from exposure 

to onset of abnormal serum ALT levels and 90 days (range: 

60–150 days) from exposure to onset of jaundice (8,42,43). 

Infants, children aged &lt;5 years, and immunosuppressed adults 

with newly acquired HBV infection typically are asymptomatic, 

whereas symptomatic illness is noted in 30%–50% of older 

children, adolescents, and adults (7,8,44,50). When present, 

signs and symptoms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal 

pain, fever, dark urine, changes in stool color, hepatomegaly, 

splenomegaly, and jaundice. Malaise and anorexia might 

precede jaundice by 1–2 weeks. Fulminant HBV infection is 

uncommon (&lt;1%) but often results in death or liver failure 

necessitating liver transplantation. Extrahepatic manifestations 

of disease (e.g., skin rash, arthralgias, and arthritis) also might 

occur (51). The fatality rate among persons with reported 

cases of acute HBV infection is &lt;1.5%, with the highest rates 


Recommendations and Reports

6 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

in adults aged ≥55 years. Because a substantial number of 

infections are asymptomatic and therefore are not reported, 

the overall fatality rate among all persons with HBV infection 

is likely lower (8).

Chronic infection occurs among 80%–90% of persons 

infected during infancy, 30% of persons infected before 

age 6 years, and &lt;1%–12% of persons infected as an older 

child or adult (7,52–54). Approximately 95% of primary 

infections in immunocompetent adults are self-limited, with 

elimination of the virus from blood and generally immunity 

to reinfection. Chronic infection develops more frequently 

in immunosuppressed persons (e.g., hemodialysis patients 

and persons with human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] 

infection) (54,55) and persons with diabetes (54). Chronic 

HBV infection can result in cirrhosis of the liver, liver cancer, 

liver failure, and death. Approximately 25% of persons who 

become chronically infected during childhood and 15% of 

those who become chronically infected after childhood will 

die prematurely from cirrhosis or liver cancer (8,56–58).

There are four phases of chronic HBV infection: immune 

tolerant, immune active, immune inactive, and reactivation. 

Chronically infected persons do not necessarily pass through 

these phases in a linear fashion. Persons in the immune 

tolerant phase have no or minimal hepatic inflammation or 

fibrosis; most chronically infected children will remain in the 

immune tolerant phase until late childhood or adolescence. 

The immune active phase is characterized by an active immune 

response resulting in hepatic inflammation, with or without 

fibrosis. Persons who remain in the immune active phase 

for prolonged periods of time are at high risk for developing 

cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Persons in the immune 

inactive phase have improvement of hepatic inflammation and 

fibrosis. Risk for progression to hepatocellular carcinoma is 

lower among persons in the immune inactive phase compared 

with the active phase. Persons in the reactivation phase have 

active liver inflammation with or without fibrosis (44,59–61). 

HBV reactivation might occur with immunosuppressive 

therapy or treatment for HCV (62).

No specific treatment exists for acute HBV infection; 

supportive care is the mainstay of therapy. Guidelines for 

management of chronic HBV infection in children and adults, 

including disease monitoring and antiviral therapy, are available 

(5). Antiviral therapy generally should be initiated in patients 

with chronic HBV infection who are likely to respond to 

treatment and who are at high risk for liver-related morbidity 

(5). Maternal antiviral therapy to reduce perinatal transmission 

is suggested for HBsAg-positive pregnant women whose HBV 

DNA level is &gt;200,000 IU/mL (5).

In areas in which HBV is highly endemic, HBV frequently 

is transmitted perinatally from HBV-infected pregnant women 

to their newborns. The majority of cases of perinatal HBV 

transmission occur during delivery, with rare instances of in 

utero transmission (63). HBV transmission might occur in germ 

cell lines, as the virus has been detected in sperm, oocytes, and 

embryos. Available data do not support the need for a cesarean 

delivery among HBV-infected pregnant women with low HBV 

DNA (63). Prior to the widespread availability of postexposure 

prophylaxis, the proportion of infants born to HBsAg-positive 

women acquiring HBV infection was approximately 30% for 

those born to HBeAg-negative mothers and 85% for those born 

to HBeAg-positive mothers. With postexposure prophylaxis, 

comprised of HepB vaccine and HBIG at birth, followed by 

completion of the HepB vaccine series, 0.7%–1.1% of infants 

develop infection (28,29,64); infants born to mothers with high 

viral loads are at greatest risk for infection despite receipt of HepB 

vaccine and HBIG (29). Unvaccinated infants and children are 

also at risk for horizontal transmission from infected household 

and other contacts.

Interpretation of Serologic Markers

Serologic markers for HBV infection include HBsAg, 

antibody to HBsAg (anti-HBs), immunoglobulin class M 

(IgM) antibodies to hepatitis B core antigen (IgM anti-HBc), 

and immunoglobulin class G (IgG) anti-HBc (IgG anti-HBc) 

(49,65,66). At least one serologic marker is present during 

the different phases of infection. HBV DNA is a measure 

of viral load and reflects viral replication (49) (Table 1). 

Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) can be detected in persons 

with acute or chronic HBV infection; the presence of HBeAg 

correlates with viral replication and high infectivity; antibody 

to HBeAg (anti-HBe) correlates with the loss of replicating 

virus, although reversion to HBeAg positivity can occur (7).

A confirmed positive HBsAg result indicates current HBV 

infection, either acute or chronic. All HBsAg-positive persons are 

infectious. If HBsAg persists for &gt;6 months, spontaneous clearance 

is unlikely, and the infection is deemed chronic. HBV DNA can 

be detected prior to the detection of HBsAg in an infected person. 

Occult infection occurs when HBsAg is undetectable despite the 

presence of HBV DNA (66–68). Transient HBsAg positivity can 

occur up to 18 days following vaccination (up to 52 days among 

hemodialysis patients) and is clinically insignificant (69).

In acute HBV infection, anti-HBc (initially both IgM and 

IgG) appears 1–2 weeks after the appearance of HBsAg (49) 

(Figure 2). IgM anti-HBc often becomes undetectable within 

6 months, and IgG anti-HBc predominates and remains 

detectable for a lengthy period of time, often life-long (65,66). 

The presence of IgM anti-HBc is indicative of acute infection, 

while IgG anti-HBc indicates past infection (65,66). In persons 

who recover from HBV infection, HBsAg is eliminated from 


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

7

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

TABLE 1. Typical interpretation of test results for hepatitis B virus infection

HBsAg

Total anti-HBc IgM anti-HBc

Anti-HBs

HBV DNA

Interpretation

-

-

-

-

-

Never infected

+

-

-

-

+ or -

Early acute infection; transient (up to 18 days) after vaccination

+

+

+

-

+

Acute infection

-

+

+

+ or -

+ or -

Acute resolving infection

-

+

-

+

-

Recovered from past infection and immune

+

+

-

-

+

Chronic infection

-

+

-

-

+ or -

False-positive (i.e., susceptible); past infection; “low-level” chronic infection; or passive 

transfer of anti-HBc to infant born to HBsAg-positive mother

-

-

-

+

-

Immune if anti-HBs concentration is ≥10 mIU/mL after vaccine series completion; 

passive transfer after hepatitis B immune globulin administration

Abbreviations: - = negative; + = positive; anti-HBc = antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; anti-HBs = antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen; HBsAg = hepatitis B 

surface antigen; HBV DNA = hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid; IgM = immunoglobulin class M.

the blood and anti-HBs develops, typically within 3–4 months. 

The presence of anti-HBs is generally indicative of immunity 

to HBV infection (8). Anti-HBs also can be detected for 4–6 

months following HBIG administration (10). Persons who 

recover from natural HBV infection are typically positive for 

both anti-HBs and anti-HBc, whereas persons who respond to 

HepB vaccine are positive only for anti-HBs. Approximately 

0.5%–2% of persons with chronic infection spontaneously 

clear HBsAg yearly; anti-HBs will develop in the majority of 

these persons (8).

In certain persons, anti-HBc is the only serologic marker 

detected. Isolated anti-HBc-positivity can be detected 

following HBV infection in persons who have recovered but 

whose anti-HBs levels have waned; in populations with a 

high prevalence of HBV infection, isolated anti-HBc likely 

indicates previous infection with loss of anti-HBs. Some 

chronically infected persons with isolated anti-HBc-positivity 

have circulating HBsAg that is not detectable by a laboratory 

assay. HBV DNA has been detected in &lt;10% of persons with 

isolated anti-HBc (70,71), although the presence of detectable 

HBV DNA might fluctuate (72). These persons are unlikely to 

transmit infection except under circumstances in which they 

are the source of a large exposure, such as a blood transfusion 

(8,73). Persons who are HBsAg-negative and anti-HBc-positive 

can experience reactivation of infection during chemotherapy 

or immunosuppressive therapy, with reappearance of HBsAg 

(49). Infection with a mutant HBV strain can result in positive 

laboratory tests for HBsAg, total anti-HBc, anti-HBs, and 

HBV DNA, with a negative IgM anti-HBc.

Perinatal HBV infection in a child aged ≤24 months is 

typically asymptomatic although fulminant hepatitis can occur; 

a positive HBsAg test, positive HBeAg test, or detectable HBV 

DNA may be considered laboratory evidence of perinatal HBV 

in an infant born to an HBV-infected mother if timing criteria 

are met (74). Infants who are born to HBsAg-positive mothers 

and who do not become infected might have detectable 

anti-HBc for up to 24 months after birth from passively 

acquired maternal antibody (7).

Adults at Risk for HBV Infection

In 2015, CDC received 3,370 surveillance case-reports 

of acute HBV infection. Of 2,207 case-reports with risk 

information, 1,151 (52.2%) indicated no risk for HBV 

during the 6 weeks to 6 months prior to illness onset, and the 

remainder indicated at least one risk factor. Injection-drug use 

and multiple sex partners were the most common reported 

sources of HBV transmission (4).

Injection-drug use. Injection-drug use was reported by 

30.3% of 1,657 new reported HBV cases that included 

information about injection-drug use (4). Since 2009, there has 

been an increase in acute HBV infection among non-Hispanic 

whites aged 30–39 years residing in nonurban areas reporting 

injection-drug use as a risk factor (16). Chronic HBV infection 

has been identified in 3.5%-20.0% (midpoint estimate 11.8%) 

of persons who inject drugs (PWID) in a variety of settings 

(75) and 22.6% of PWID have evidence of past infection 

(75). The proportion of HBV cases reporting injection-drug 

use in three states (Kentucky, Tennessee, and West Virginia) 

increased significantly, from 53% during 2006–2009 to 75% 

during 2010–2013 (p&lt;0.001, chi-square) (16).

Sexual (heterosexual and MSM) exposure. Among persons 

with case-reports of HBV infection with information about 

sexual exposure, 26.4% reported having two or more sexual 

partners, 3.3% reported sexual contact with an HBV-infected 

person, and 11.8% of males reported having had sex with 

another male (4). As many as 10%–40% of adults seeking 

treatment in STI clinics have evidence of current or past HBV 

infection. Among adults with acute HBV infection, 39% were 

screened or sought care for an STI prior to becoming infected 

with HBV (76).

Household contacts. An estimated 45% of persons living 

in households with others with chronic HBV infection have 

serologic evidence of past HBV infection, and 16% have 


Recommendations and Reports

8 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

evidence of current infection (CDC, unpublished data, 2017). 

Prior to universal infant vaccination, the risk for infection was 

greatest among unvaccinated children living with a person 

with chronic HBV infection in a household or in an extended 

family setting (67,77,78).

Developmentally disabled persons in long-term-care 

facilities. Developmentally disabled persons in residential 

and nonresidential facilities historically have had a chronic 

HBV infection prevalence as high as 20%. The prevalence of 

infection has declined substantially since the implementation 

of routine HepB vaccination in these settings (79–82).

Correctional facilities. The prevalence of chronic HBV 

infection has been higher among prison inmates (1.0%–3.7%) 

than among the general population (83,84), reflecting an 

overrepresentation of persons entering correctional facilities 

with risks for HBV infection (e.g., injection-drug use and 

histories of multiple sex partners).

Persons at risk for occupational exposure to HBV. Before 

HepB vaccination was widely implemented, HBV infection 

was recognized as a common occupational risk among HCP 

(85,86). Routine HepB vaccination of HCP and the use of 

standard precautions have resulted in a 98% decline in HBV 

infections from 1983 through 2010 among HCP (10). The 

Occupational Safety and Health Administration mandates 

that employers offer HepB vaccination to all employees who 

have occupational risk and that postexposure prophylaxis be 

available following an exposure (10,87).

Hemodialysis patients. Since the initiation of HepB 

vaccination and additional infection control precautions for 

hepatitis B in dialysis centers, the incidence of HBV infection 

among hemodialysis patients has declined approximately 95% 

(88,89). Since 1995, the annual incidence has been stable and 

HBsAg seroprevalence has remained at 1% (90). Receipt of 

dialysis was reported in &lt;1% of acute HBV surveillance cases 

with information reported to CDC (4).

Persons with HCV infection. The number of reported 

HCV cases in four Appalachian states (Kentucky, Tennessee, 

Virginia, and West Virginia) increased 364% during 2006–

2012 among persons aged ≤30 years, with injection-drug use 

as the most common reported risk factor (91). The increase 

in HCV infections occurred concomitantly with an increase 

in HBV infections among young adults in rural communities 

in Appalachian states.

Persons with chronic liver disease. Persons with chronic 

liver disease (e.g., cirrhosis, fatty liver disease, alcoholic liver 

disease, and autoimmune hepatitis) are not at increased risk 

for HBV infection unless they have percutaneous or mucosal 

FIGURE 2. Acute hepatitis B virus infection with recovery

Titer

Weeks after exposure

0

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

32

36

52

100

Total anti-HBc

IgM anti-HBc

Anti-HBs

HBsAg

HBV DNA

HBeAG

Anti-HBe

Symptoms

Abbreviations: anti-HBc = antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; anti-HBe = 

antibody to hepatitis B e antigen; anti-HBs = antibody to hepatitis B surface 

antigen; HBeAg = hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV 

DNA = hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid; IgM = immunoglobulin class M.

exposure to blood or body fluids. However, concurrent chronic 

HBV infection might increase the risk for progressive chronic 

liver disease in these persons (92).

Travelers to countries where HBV is endemic. Short-

term travelers to countries in which HBV infection is of high 

or intermediate endemicity (Box 3) typically are at risk for 

infection only through exposure to blood in medical or disaster-

relief activities, receipt of medical care that involves parenteral 

exposures, sexual activity, or drug use. Monthly incidence of 

25‒420 per 100,000 travelers has been reported among long-

term travelers to countries where the disease is endemic (93).

Persons with HIV. Approximately 10% of HIV-positive 

persons are coinfected with HBV (94–97). Chronic HBV 

infection has been identified in 6%–14% of HIV-positive 

persons, including in 9%–17% of MSM and in 7%–10% 

of PWID (98). Coinfected persons have increased rates of 

cirrhosis and liver-related mortality (99).

Persons with diabetes. Compared with adults without 

diabetes, adults with diabetes have a 60% higher prevalence 

of past or present HBV infection and twice the odds of 

acquiring acute HBV. Repeated outbreaks of HBV infection 

associated with assisted blood glucose monitoring underscore 

the continued risk for this population (100–102). Data also 

suggest the possibility of a higher case-fatality proportion 

among persons with diabetes acutely infected with HBV 

compared with those without diabetes (9).


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

9

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

BOX 3. Prevalence of chronic hepatitis B virus infection, by country*

High (≥8% prevalence): Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, 

Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Congo, 

Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, 

Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Haiti, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, 

Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia, Mozambique, 

Namibia, Nauru, Niger, Nigeria, Niue, Papua New Guinea, 

Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South 

Sudan, Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tonga, Uganda, Vanuatu, 

Vietnam, Yemen, and Zimbabwe.

Intermediate (5%–7.9% prevalence): Albania, Bhutan, 

Cape Verde, China, Democratic Republic of the 

Congo, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Marshall Islands, 

Moldova, Oman, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, South 

Africa, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, Tunisia, Tuvalu, 

Uzbekistan, and Zambia.

Low Intermediate (2%–4.9% prevalence): Algeria, 

Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Brunei Darussalam, 

Bulgaria, Cambodia, Colombia, Cyprus, Dominican 

Republic, Ecuador, Eritrea, Federated States of Micronesia, 

Fiji, Georgia, Italy, Jamaica, Kosovo, Libya, Madagascar, 

Myanmar, New Zealand, Pakistan, Palau, Philippines, Peru, 

Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, 

Suriname, Syria, Tahiti, and Turkey.

Low (≤1.9% prevalence): Afghanistan, Argentina, 

Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia 

and Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, 

Cuba, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, France, Germany, 

Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, 

Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, 

Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, 

Nicaragua, Norway, Palestine, Panama, Poland, Portugal, 

Qatar, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, 

Switzerland, Ukraine, UK, United Arab Emirates, United 

States of America, and Venezuela. 

No data: Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, 

The Bahamas, Botswana, Chad, Comoros, Cook Islands, 

Dominica, El Salvador, Finland, Grenada, Guinea- 

Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Latvia, Lesotho, Lithuania, 

Luxembourg, Macedonia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, 

Monaco, Montenegro, North Korea, Paraguay, Saint Kitts 

and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, 

San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Timor-Leste, Trinidad 

and Tobago, Turkmenistan, and Uruguay.

* Source: CDC. Travelers health: infectious diseases related to travel. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2017.

Prophylaxis Against HBV Infection

Hepatitis B Vaccines and 

Hepatitis B Immune Globulins

HepB vaccination is the mainstay of HBV prevention 

efforts; HBIG is generally used as an adjunct to HepB vaccine 

in infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers and in certain 

other postexposure prophylaxis situations. The first HepB 

vaccines consisted of plasma-derived HBsAg. Recombinant 

HepB vaccines containing yeast-derived HBsAg purified by 

biochemical and biophysical separation techniques replaced the 

plasma-derived vaccines in the United States by the late 1980s 

(64,103,104). HepB vaccines recommended for use in the 

United States are formulated to contain 10–40 µg of HBsAg 

protein/mL and do not contain thimerosal as a preservative 

(105). HBIG can augment protection until a response to 

vaccination is attained. For those who do not respond to 

HepB vaccination, HBIG administered alone is the primary 

means of protection after an HBV exposure. HBIG provides 

passively acquired anti-HBs and temporary protection (i.e., 

3–6 months). Passively acquired anti-HBs can be detected for 

4–6 months after administration of HBIG (10).

HepB vaccines are available as a single-antigen formulation 

and in combination with other vaccines. The two single-

antigen vaccines recommended for use in the United States, 

Engerix-B (GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, Rixensart, Belgium) 

and Recombivax HB (Merck &amp; Co., Inc., Whitehouse 

Station, New Jersey), are used for the vaccination of persons 

starting at birth. Of the two combination vaccines, Pediarix 

(GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, Rixensart, Belgium) is used for 

the vaccination of persons aged 6 weeks–6 years and contains 

recombinant HBsAg, diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and 

acellular pertussis adsorbed, and inactivated poliovirus and 

Twinrix (GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, Rixensart, Belgium) 

is used for the vaccination of persons aged ≥18 years and 

contains recombinant HBsAg and inactivated hepatitis A virus 

(Table 2). Comvax (Merck &amp; Co., Inc., Whitehouse Station, 

New Jersey), which was used previously for the vaccination of 

persons aged 6 weeks–15 months and contained recombinant 

HBsAg and Haemophilus b conjugate vaccine, has not been 

available for purchase directly from Merck since January 1, 

2015. Discontinuation of Comvax was not related to any 

product safety or manufacturing issues. Aluminum salts 

generally are used as adjuvants to enhance the immune response 

of vaccinated persons.


Recommendations and Reports

10 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

TABLE 2. Recommended doses of hepatitis B vaccine, by group and vaccine type

Age group (yrs)

Single-antigen vaccine

Combination vaccine

Recombivax

Engerix

Pediarix*

Twinrix†

Dose (µg)

Vol (mL)

Dose (µg)

Vol (mL)

Dose (µg)

Vol (mL)

Dose (µg)

Vol (mL)

Birth–10

5

0.5

10

0.5

10*

0.5

N/A

N/A

11–15

10§

1

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

11–19

5

0.5

10

0.5

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

≥20

10

1

20

1

N/A

N/A

20†

1

Hemodialysis patients and other immune-compromised persons

&lt;20

5

0.5

10

0.5

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

≥20

40

1

40

2

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Abbreviation: N/A = not applicable.

* Pediarix is approved for use in persons aged 6 weeks through 6 years (prior to the 7th birthday).

† Twinrix is approved for use in persons aged ≥18 years.

§ Adult formulation administered on a 2-dose schedule.

Two HBIG products are licensed for use in the United States: 

HepaGam B (Cangene Corporation, Winnipeg, Canada) 

and Nabi-HB (Biotest Pharmaceuticals Corporation, Boca 

Raton, Florida). HBIG is prepared from the plasma of donors 

with high concentrations of anti-HBs. Source plasma tests 

negative for evidence of HIV, HBV, and HCV. Investigational 

nucleic acid testing for hepatitis A virus and parvovirus B19 

also is performed on pooled samples of source plasma. The 

manufacturing process contains two steps to inactivate viruses 

in the final product: the solvent and detergent step inactivates 

enveloped viruses, and the virus filtration step removes viruses 

based on their size. HBIG products licensed for use in the 

United States contain no preservative and are intended for 

single use only (106).

Vaccine-Induced Seroprotection

The presence of anti-HBs typically indicates immunity 

against HBV infection. Immunocompetent children and adults 

who have vaccine-induced anti-HBs levels of ≥10 mIU/mL 

1–2 months after having received a complete HepB vaccine 

series are considered seroprotected and deemed vaccine 

responders (107). Vaccine-induced seroprotection is considered 

a surrogate of clinical protection. Anti-HBs levels wane 

over time following vaccination related in part to the age at 

vaccination. Approximately 16% of persons vaccinated at age 

&lt;1 year have antibody levels of ≥10 mIU/mL 18 years following 

vaccination, compared with 74% for those vaccinated at 

age ≥1 year (10). However, persons initially responding to 

the full 3-dose HepB vaccine series and who are later found 

to have anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL remain protected. Most 

persons (88%) who receive a challenge dose of HepB vaccine 

30 years after HepB vaccination as children or adults develop 

an antibody response of ≥10 mIU/mL indicating persistent 

immunity to HBV infection (108). Data from this and other 

studies suggests protection against acute symptomatic and 

chronic HBV infection persists for 30 years or more among 

immunocompetent persons who originally responded to HepB 

vaccine (108–110).

The 3-dose HepB vaccine series produces a protective 

antibody response (anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL) in approximately 

95% of healthy infants overall (response is lower for infants 

with lower birth weights) (64) and &gt;90% of healthy adults 

aged &lt;40 years (111,112). Among healthy infants, 25% and 

63% achieve anti-HBs levels ≥10 mIU/mL after the first and 

second dose, respectively. Among healthy adults aged &lt;40 years, 

30%–55% and 75% achieve anti-HBs levels ≥10 mIU/mL 

after the first and second dose, respectively (7,8,64). Vaccine 

response is decreased among infants weighing &lt;2000 grams 

and older adults. Other factors (e.g., smoking, obesity, aging, 

chronic medical conditions, drug use, diabetes, male sex, genetic 

factors, and immune suppression) contribute to a decreased 

response to vaccine (113–116). Although immunogenicity is 

lower among immunocompromised persons, those who achieve 

and maintain seroprotective antibody levels before exposure 

to HBV have a high level of protection (8).

Birth dose. A birth dose of HepB vaccine serves as 

postexposure prophylaxis to prevent perinatal HBV infection 

among infants born to HBV-infected mothers. Although 

infants requiring postexposure prophylaxis should be identified 

by maternal HBsAg testing, administration of a birth dose 

to all infants (even without HBIG) serves as a safeguard to 

prevent perinatal transmission among infants born to HBsAg-

positive mothers not identified prenatally because of lack of 

maternal HBsAg testing or failures in reporting test results. 

HepB vaccine or HBIG given alone are 75% and 71% effective 

in preventing perinatal HBV transmission, respectively; their 

combined efficacy is 94% (29,52,117). The birth dose also 

provides protection to infants at risk from household exposure 

after the perinatal period (29,64).

Vaccination produces seroprotection in 98% of healthy 

term infants. Vaccine response is lower among infants with 

birth weights &lt;2000 grams (64). A study among low birth 


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

11

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

weight infants demonstrated that more infants achieved 

seroprotective anti-HBs levels when vaccine was initiated at 

1 month of age versus within the first 3 days of life (96% vs. 

68%, p&lt;0.02) (118). Vaccine response among infants does 

not vary appreciably by maternal HBsAg status or HBIG 

administration (64).

Adolescents. Approximately 95% of adolescents achieve 

seroprotection following HepB vaccination with a complete 

series (7). The adult (10 µg) dose of Recombivax HB 

administered using a 2-dose compressed schedule at 0 and 

4 months or 0 and 6 months for persons aged 11–15 years 

produces seroprotection proportions nearly equivalent to those 

obtained with the standard regimen of 5 µg administered on 

a 3-dose schedule at 0, 1, and 6 months (99.2% vs. 98.3%) 

(119,120). Data on long-term antibody persistence or 

protection among adolescents for 2-dose schedules are lacking.

Adults. Vaccination with a complete series results in 

seroprotection in &gt;90% of healthy adults aged &lt;40 years. 

Response decreases with age, and seroprotection is achieved 

in 75% of persons aged 60 years (8).

Diabetes. A review of studies assessing HepB vaccine 

response among persons with diabetes mellitus demonstrated 

seroprotection in 93.9% for children with diabetes mellitus 

compared with 100% for children without diabetes mellitus 

(112,121).

Among adults, 88.2% of those with diabetes mellitus, 

compared with 93.6% of those without diabetes mellitus, 

achieved seroprotection (112). Among hemodialysis/chronic 

kidney disease patients, the median proportion protected was 

60.1% for those with diabetes mellitus, compared with 75.1% 

for those without diabetes mellitus (112).

Immunocompromising conditions. The humoral 

response to HepB vaccine is reduced in children and adults 

who are immunocompromised (e.g., hematopoietic stem cell 

transplant recipients, patients undergoing chemotherapy, 

and HIV-infected persons) (122,123). Modified dosing 

regimens, including a doubling of the standard antigen 

dose or administration of additional doses, might increase 

response rates. However, data on response to these alternative 

vaccination schedules are limited (6).

Vaccine Safety

In prelicensure trials, adverse events following HepB 

vaccination were most commonly injection site reactions 

and mild systemic reactions (106). Commonly reported mild 

adverse events from postmarketing data include pain (3%–

29%), erythema (3%), swelling (3%), fever (1%–6%), and 

headache (3%) (124). The estimated incidence of anaphylaxis 

among HepB vaccine recipients is 1.1 per million vaccine doses 

(125). In 2011, the Institute of Medicine concluded that the 

evidence convincingly supports a causal relationship between 

HepB vaccine and anaphylaxis in yeast-sensitive persons, and 

that the evidence is inadequate to accept or reject a causal 

relation between HepB vaccine and several neurologic, chronic, 

and autoimmune diseases (126).

During early postlicensure surveillance, several adverse 

events following HepB vaccination have been described in 

the scientific literature, including Guillain-Barré Syndrome 

(GBS), chronic fatigue syndrome, optic neuritis, multiple 

sclerosis, and diabetes mellitus; however, multiple studies 

have demonstrated no association between receipt of HepB 

vaccine and these conditions (126–129). In addition, no 

evidence of a causal association between rheumatoid arthritis 

(130), Bell’s palsy (131), autoimmune thyroid disease (132), 

hemolytic anemia in children (133), anaphylaxis (134), optic 

neuritis (135), Guillain-Barré Syndrome (136), sudden-onset 

sensorineural hearing loss (137), or other chronic illnesses 

and receipt of HepB vaccine has been demonstrated through 

analysis of VSD data.

During 2005–2015, a total of 20,231 reports of adverse 

events following HepB vaccination among all ages were 

submitted to VAERS. The majority of primary U.S. reports 

(15,787 of 20,231, 78%) were following HepB vaccine 

administered with other vaccines on the same visit. Among 

these, the percentage classified as serious (i.e., if one or more 

of the following is reported: death, life-threatening illness, 

hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, 

or permanent disability)† was 16.7%, including 402 deaths, 

of which 388 were among infants aged 6 weeks–23 months 

(138). The most frequently reported adverse events for 

vaccines given in combination were fever (23%), injection 

site erythema (11%), and vomiting (10%) (138). Among the 

4,444 single-antigen HepB reports, 6.5% were classified as 

serious, including 43 deaths, of which 27 were among infants 

aged ≤4 weeks. The most frequently reported adverse events 

for single-antigen HepB vaccine were nausea/dizziness (8%) 

and fever/headache (7%).

Vaccination Schedules

Vaccine schedules are determined on the basis of 

immunogenicity data, and, for infants and children, the need 

to integrate HepB vaccine into a harmonized immunization 

schedule (Tables 3 and 4). Primary vaccination generally 

consists of three intramuscular doses administered on a 0-, 

1-, and 6-month schedule (Table 4). Recombivax HB may be 

administered in a 2-dose schedule at 0 and 4–6 months for 

† Code of Federal Regulations. 21 CFR §600.80. Revised April 1, 2010. Available at 

https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm? fr=600.80.


Recommendations and Reports

12 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

TABLE 3. Hepatitis B vaccine schedules for infants, by infant birthweight and maternal HBsAg status

Birthweight

Maternal HBsAg status

Single-antigen vaccine

Single-antigen + combination vaccine†

Dose

Age

Dose

Age

≥2,000 g

Positive

1

Birth (≤12 hrs)

1

Birth (≤12 hrs)

HBIG§

Birth (≤12 hrs)

HBIG

Birth (≤12 hrs)

2

1–2 mos

2

2 mos

3

6 mos¶

3

4 mos

4

6 mos¶

Unknown*

1

Birth (≤12 hrs)

1

Birth (≤12 hrs)

2

1–2 mos

2

2 mos

3

6 mos¶

3

4 mos

4

6 mos¶

Negative

1

Birth (≤24 hrs)

1

Birth (≤24 hrs)

2

1–2 mos

2

2 mos

3

6–18 mos¶

3

4 mos

4

6 mos¶

&lt;2,000 g

Positive

1

Birth (≤12 hrs)

1

Birth (≤12 hrs)

HBIG

Birth (≤12 hrs)

HBIG

Birth (≤12 hrs)

2

1 mos

2

2 mos

3

2–3 mos

3

4 mos

4

6 mos¶

4

6 mos¶

Unknown

1

Birth (≤12 hrs)

1

Birth (≤12 hrs)

HBIG

Birth (≤12 hrs)

HBIG

Birth (≤12 hrs)

2

1 mos

2

2 mos

3

2–3 mos

3

4 mos

4

6 mos¶

4

6 mos¶

Negative

1

Hospital discharge or age 1 mo

1

Hospital discharge or age 1 mo

2

2 mos

2

2 mos

3

6–18 mos¶

3

4 mos

4

6 mos¶

Abbreviations: HBIG = hepatitis B immune globulin; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen.

* Mothers should have blood drawn and tested for HBsAg as soon as possible after admission for delivery; if the mother is found to be HBsAg positive, the infant 

should receive HBIG as soon as possible but no later than age 7 days.

† Pediarix should not be administered before age 6 weeks.

§ HBIG should be administered at a separate anatomical site from vaccine.

¶ The final dose in the vaccine series should not be administered before age 24 weeks (164 days).

persons aged 11–15 years using the adult formulation. Pediarix 

is administered at ages 2, 4, and 6 months; it is not used for 

the birth dose. Twinrix may be administered before travel or 

any other potential exposure on an accelerated schedule at 0, 

7, and 21–30 days, followed by a dose at 12 months. HepB 

vaccination of adult hemodialysis patients consists of high-dose 

(40 µg) Recombivax HB administered on a 0-, 1-, and 6-month 

schedule or high-dose (40 µg) Engerix-B administered on a 

0-, 1-, 2-, and 6-month schedule (106).

Alternative vaccination schedules (e.g., 0, 1, and 4 months 

or 0, 2, and 4 months) have been demonstrated to elicit dose-

specific and final rates of seroprotection similar to those obtained 

on a 0-, 1-, and 6-month schedule. Increasing the interval 

between the first 2 doses has little effect on immunogenicity 

or the final antibody concentration (139–141). The third dose 

confers the maximum level of seroprotection and provides 

long-term protection (142). Longer intervals between the 

last 2 doses (e.g., 11 months) result in higher final antibody 

levels (142) but might increase the risk for acquisition of 

HBV infection among persons who have a delayed response 

to vaccination. Higher geometric mean titers are associated 

with longer persistence of measurable anti-HBs.

Response to Revaccination

A challenge dose of HepB vaccine may be used to determine 

the presence of vaccine-induced immunologic memory 

through generation of an anamnestic response. The term 

“booster dose” has been used to refer to a dose of HepB vaccine 

administered after a primary vaccination series to provide 

rapid protective immunity against significant infection (i.e., 

infection resulting in serologic test results positive for HBV 

and/or clinically significant disease). Among persons who were 

vaccinated prior to age 1 year and found to have anti-HBs levels 

&lt;10 mIU/mL 6–18 years later, a single challenge dose of HepB 

vaccine resulted in anti-HBs levels ≥10 mIU/mL in 60%–97% 

of those tested. Similar results were found among persons 

initially vaccinated at age ≥1 year (10). Immunocompetent 

persons with a response ≥10 mIU/mL following a challenge 


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

13

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

dose are considered protected, regardless of subsequent declines 

in anti-HBs (10,109).

One study found that of infants born to HBsAg-positive 

women who were not infected at birth and who did not 

respond to a primary vaccine series, all developed seroprotective 

levels of anti-HBs after receipt of 3 additional doses (143). No 

data exist that suggest that children who have no detectable 

antibody after 6 doses of vaccine benefit from additional doses.

Maternal Antiviral Therapy for Preventing 

Perinatal HBV Transmission

Antiviral therapy (i.e., lamivudine, telbivudine, and 

tenofovir) has been studied as an intervention to reduce 

perinatal HBV transmission among pregnant women with 

high HBV DNA levels (e.g., average HBV DNA levels of 

7.6 log10 IU/mL) (144). Maternal antiviral therapy started 

at 28–32 weeks’ gestation, as an adjunct to HepB vaccine and 

HBIG administered to the infant shortly after delivery, has 

been associated with significantly reduced rates of perinatal 

HBV transmission (5). The use of lamivudine and telbivudine 

is limited by viral resistance and mutations. Tenofovir is not 

associated with resistance and is the preferred agent (5). 

Available data support the safety of tenofovir during pregnancy, 

although its use might be associated with reduced bone mineral 

content in infants with in utero exposure (5,39,63,144–146). 

AASLD suggests antiviral therapy to reduce perinatal HBV 

transmission when maternal HBV DNA is &gt;200,000 IU/mL. 

Maternal therapy is generally discontinued at birth to 3 months 

postpartum (5).

Cost-Effectiveness Considerations

HBV prevention strategies targeting perinatal transmission 

are considered very cost-effective (i.e., an incremental 

cost-effectiveness ratio &lt;$25,000). The current strategy of 

administering HepB vaccine and HBIG within 12 hours of 

birth for infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers and universal 

infant vaccination prior to hospital discharge has an incremental 

cost-effectiveness ratio of $6,957 per quality-adjusted life year 

(QALY) saved when compared with a strategy of universal 

infant HepB vaccination prior to hospital discharge alone 

(147). CDC’s U.S. Perinatal Hepatitis B Prevention Program 

(https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/partners/perihepbcoord.

htm), which provides case management services to infants 

born to HBsAg-positive women, also has been demonstrated 

to decrease infections, increase QALYs saved, and be a cost-

effective use of resources (148). A strategy of testing HBsAg-

positive pregnant women for HBV DNA, followed by maternal 

antiviral prophylaxis for women with high HBV DNA, would 

TABLE 4. Hepatitis B vaccine schedules for children, adolescents, and adults

Age group

Schedule* (interval represents time 

in months from first dose)

Children (1–10 yrs)

0, 1, and 6 mos

0, 1, 2, and 12 mos

Adolescents (11–19 yrs)

0, 1, and 6 mos

0, 12, and 24 mos

0 and 4–6 mos†

0, 1, 2, and 12 mos

0, 7 days, 21–30 days, 12 mos§

Adults (≥20 yrs)

0, 1, and 6 mos

0, 1, 2, and 12 mos

0, 1, 2, and 6 mos¶

0, 7 days, 21–30 days, 12 mos§

* Refer to package inserts for further information. For all ages, when the HepB 

vaccine schedule is interrupted, the vaccine series does not need to be 

restarted. If the series is interrupted after the first dose, the second dose should 

be administered as soon as possible, and the second and third doses should 

be separated by an interval of at least 8 weeks. If only the third dose has been 

delayed, it should be administered as soon as possible. The final dose of vaccine 

must be administered at least 8 weeks after the second dose and should follow 

the first dose by at least 16 weeks; the minimum interval between the first and 

second doses is 4 weeks. Inadequate doses of hepatitis B vaccine or doses 

received after a shorter-than-recommended dosing interval should be 

readministered, using the correct dosage or schedule. Vaccine doses 

administered ≤4 days before the minimum interval or age are considered valid. 

Because of the unique accelerated schedule for Twinrix, the 4-day guideline 

does not apply to the first three doses of this vaccine when administered on a 

0-day, 7-day, 21–30-day, and 12-month schedule (new recommendation).

† A 2-dose schedule of Recombivax adult formulation (10 µg) is licensed for 

adolescents aged 11–15 years. When scheduled to receive the second dose, 

adolescents aged &gt;15 years should be switched to a 3-dose series, with doses 2 and 

3 consisting of the pediatric formulation administered on an appropriate schedule.

§ Twinrix is approved for use in persons aged ≥18 years and is available on an 

accelerated schedule with doses administered at 0, 7, 21–30 days, and 12 months.

¶ A 4-dose schedule of Engerix administered in two 1 mL doses (40 µg) on a 0-, 

1-, 2-, and 6-month schedule is recommended for adult hemodialysis patients. 

cost an additional $3 million but would save 2,080 QALYs and 

prevent 324 chronic HBV infections, and therefore would be 

considered cost-effective, with an incremental cost-effectiveness 

ratio of $1,583 per QALY saved (36).

Cost-effectiveness also has been assessed for HBV prevention 

strategies outside of the perinatal setting. Vaccinating adults 

aged 20–59 years with diabetes mellitus costs $75,094 per 

QALY saved; cost-effectiveness ratios increase with age at 

vaccination (149). Among previously vaccinated current 

HCP (including those in training), pre-exposure anti-HBs 

testing followed by revaccination and retesting (if necessary, 

based on anti-HBs levels), compared with no intervention, 

was not considered cost-effective with an incremental cost per 

QALY saved of $3–$4 million at year one and approximately 

$800,000 over 10 years (150).

Recommendations

This section contains guidance for the prevention of HBV 

infection, including ACIP recommendations for HepB 

vaccination of infants, children, adolescents, and adults 


Recommendations and Reports

14 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

(Box 4) and CDC and ACIP recommendations for HBV 

prophylaxis following occupational and nonoccupational 

exposures, respectively.

Prevention of Perinatal HBV Transmission

Identification and Management of HBV-Infected 

Pregnant Women

• All pregnant women should be tested for HBsAg during 

an early prenatal visit (e.g., first trimester) in each 

pregnancy, even if they have been vaccinated or tested 

previously. Testing those pregnant women known to be 

chronically infected with HBV provides documentation 

of the positive HBsAg test result obtained during 

pregnancy and helps to ensure that their infants will be 

identified for timely prophylaxis.

 – All HBsAg-positive pregnant women should be tested 

for HBV DNA to guide the use of maternal antiviral 

therapy during pregnancy for the prevention of 

perinatal HBV transmission (new recommendation).

 – AASLD suggests maternal antiviral therapy when the 

maternal HBV DNA is &gt;200,000 IU/mL 

(new recommendation).

 – All HBsAg-positive pregnant women should be referred 

to their jurisdiction’s Perinatal Hepatitis B Prevention 

Program (PHBPP) for case management to ensure that 

their infants receive timely prophylaxis and follow-up. 

A copy of the original laboratory report indicating the 

pregnant woman’s HBsAg-positive status should be 

provided to the hospital or birthing facility where the 

delivery is planned and to the HCP who will care for 

the newborn infant.

 – All HBsAg-positive pregnant women should receive 

information concerning HBV that discusses the 

potential use of antiviral therapy, the importance of 

prophylaxis for their infant (HepB vaccine and HBIG 

within 12 hours of birth), completion of the vaccine 

series, and postvaccination serologic testing.

• Women not tested prenatally, those with clinical hepatitis, 

and those whose behaviors place them at high risk for 

HBV infection (e.g., recent or current injection-drug use, 

having had more than one sex partner in the previous 

6 months or an HBsAg-positive sex partner, having been 

evaluated or treated for a STI) should be tested at the time 

of admission to the hospital or birthing facility for delivery.

• All laboratories that provide HBsAg testing of pregnant 

women should use a Food and Drug Administration–

licensed or approved HBsAg test and should perform 

testing according to the manufacturer’s labeling, including 

BOX 4. Persons recommended to receive hepatitis B vaccination

• All infants

• Unvaccinated children aged &lt;19 years

• Persons at risk for infection by sexual exposure

 – Sex partners of hepatitis B surface antigen 

(HBsAg)–positive persons

 – Sexually active persons who are not in a long-term, 

mutually monogamous relationship (e.g., persons 

with more than one sex partner during the previous 

6 months)

 – Persons seeking evaluation or treatment for a 

sexually transmitted infection

 – Men who have sex with men

• Persons at risk for infection by percutaneous or 

mucosal exposure to blood

 – Current or recent injection-drug users

 – Household contacts of HBsAg-positive persons

 – Residents and staff of facilities for developmentally 

disabled persons

 – Health care and public safety personnel with 

reasonably anticipated risk for exposure to blood 

or blood-contaminated body fluids

 – Hemodialysis patients and predialysis, peritoneal 

dialysis, and home dialysis patients

 – Persons with diabetes aged 19–59 years; persons 

with diabetes aged ≥60 years at the discretion of 

the treating clinician

• Others

 – International travelers to countries with high or 

intermediate levels of endemic hepatitis B virus 

(HBV) infection (HBsAg prevalence of ≥2%)

 – Persons with hepatitis C virus infection

 – Persons with chronic liver disease (including, but 

not limited to, persons with cirrhosis, fatty liver 

disease, alcoholic liver disease, autoimmune 

hepatitis, and an alanine aminotransferase [ALT] 

or aspartate aminotransferase [AST] level greater 

than twice the upper limit of normal)

 – Persons with HIV infection

 – Incarcerated persons

 – All other persons seeking protection from HBV 

infection

testing of initially reactive specimens with a licensed 

neutralizing confirmatory test. When pregnant women 

are tested for HBsAg at the time of admission for delivery, 

shortened testing protocols may be used and initially 

reactive results reported to expedite administration of 


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

15

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

postexposure prophylaxis of infants. Commercial 

laboratories should be encouraged to capture pregnancy 

status for women tested for HBsAg to aid in identification 

of HBV-infected pregnant women.

Management of Infants Born to Women Who Are 

HBsAg-Positive

• All infants born to HBsAg-positive women should receive 

HepB vaccine and HBIG within 12 hours of birth, 

administered at different injection sites (e.g., separate 

limbs). Only single-antigen HepB vaccine should be used 

for the birth dose (Table 3).

• Infants born to women for whom HBsAg testing results 

during pregnancy are not available but other evidence 

suggestive of maternal HBV infection exists (e.g., presence 

of HBV DNA, HBeAg-positive, or mother known to be 

chronically infected with HBV) should be managed as if 

born to an HBsAg-positive mother (new recommendation).

• The HepB vaccine series should be completed according 

to the recommended schedule for infants born to HBsAg-

positive mothers. The final dose in the series should not 

be administered before age 24 weeks (164 days). Although 

not indicated in the manufacturers’ package labeling, 

Pediarix may be used for infants aged ≥6 weeks born to 

HBsAg-positive mothers to complete the vaccine series 

after receipt of a birth dose of single-antigen HepB vaccine 

and HBIG.

• For infants weighing &lt;2,000 grams, the birth dose (i.e., 

the initial HepB vaccine dose) should not be counted as 

part of the vaccine series because of the potentially reduced 

immunogenicity of HepB vaccine in these infants; 3 

additional doses of vaccine (for a total of 4 doses) should 

be administered beginning when the infant reaches age 

1 month. The final dose in the series should not be 

administered before age 24 weeks (164 days).

• Postvaccination serologic testing for anti-HBs and HBsAg 

should be performed after completion of the vaccine series 

at age 9–12 months (generally at the next well-child visit 

following completion of the HepB vaccine series). 

Postvaccination serologic testing should be performed for 

infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers and infants whose 

mother’s HBsAg status remains unknown (i.e., those 

infants who are safely surrendered shortly after birth) (new 

recommendation). Anti-HBs testing should be performed 

using a method that allows detection of the protective 

concentration of anti-HBs (≥10 mIU/mL). Testing should 

not be performed before age nine months to avoid 

detection of passive anti-HBs from HBIG administered 

at birth and to maximize the likelihood of detecting late 

HBV infection. Anti-HBc testing of infants is not 

recommended because passively acquired maternal anti-

HBc might be detected in infants born to HBsAg-positive 

mothers up to age 24 months.

 – HBsAg-negative infants with anti-HBs levels ≥10 mIU/

mL are protected and need no further medical management.

 – HBsAg-negative infants with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL 

should be revaccinated with a single dose of HepB 

vaccine and receive postvaccination serologic testing 

1–2 months later (new recommendation). Infants 

whose anti-HBs remains &lt;10 mIU/mL following single 

dose revaccination should receive two additional doses 

of HepB vaccine to complete the second series followed 

by postvaccination serologic testing 1–2 months after 

the final dose.

 – Based on clinical circumstances or family preference, 

HBsAg-negative infants with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL may 

instead be revaccinated with a second, complete 3-dose 

series, followed by postvaccination serologic testing 

performed 1–2 months after the final dose of vaccine.

 – Available data do not suggest a benefit from 

administering additional HepB vaccine doses to infants 

who have not attained anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL 

following receipt of two complete HepB vaccine series.

 – HBsAg-positive infants should be referred for 

appropriate follow-up.

• Infants who are born to HBsAg-positive mothers and 

receive postexposure prophylaxis may be breastfed 

beginning immediately after birth.

• For infants transferred to a different facility after birth 

(e.g., hospital with higher level of neonatal care), staff at 

the transferring and receiving facilities should communicate 

regarding the infant’s HepB vaccination and HBIG receipt 

status to ensure prophylaxis is administered in a timely 

manner (new recommendation).

Management of Infants Born to Women with 

Unknown HBsAg Status

• Infants born to women for whom HBsAg testing results 

during pregnancy are not available but other evidence 

suggestive of maternal HBV infection exists (e.g., presence 

of HBV DNA, HBeAg-positive, or mother known to be 

chronically infected with HBV) should be managed as if 

born to an HBsAg-positive mother (new recommendation). 

The infant should receive both HepB vaccine and HBIG 

within 12 hours of birth.

• Women admitted for delivery without documentation of 

HBsAg test results should have blood drawn and tested as 

soon as possible.

• While maternal HBsAg test results are pending, infants 

with birth weights ≥2,000 grams born to women with an 


Recommendations and Reports

16 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

unknown HBsAg status should receive the first dose of 

HepB vaccine (without HBIG) within 12 hours of birth. 

Only single-antigen HepB vaccine should be used for the 

birth dose (Table 3).

 – If the mother is determined to be HBsAg-positive, the 

infant should receive HBIG as soon as possible but no 

later than age seven days, and the vaccine series should 

be completed according to the recommended schedule 

for infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers. The final 

dose in the series should not be administered before 

age 24 weeks (164 days). If the mother is determined 

to be HBsAg-negative, the vaccine series should be 

completed according to the recommended schedule for 

infants born to HBsAg-negative mothers. The final 

dose in the series should not be administered before 

age 24 weeks (164 days).

• Because of the potentially decreased immunogenicity of 

vaccine in infants weighing &lt;2,000 grams, these infants 

should receive both single-antigen HepB vaccine and 

HBIG, administered at different injection sites (e.g., 

separate limbs), if the mother’s HBsAg status cannot be 

determined within 12 hours of birth. The birth dose of 

vaccine should not be counted as part of the 3 doses 

required to complete the vaccine series; 3 additional doses 

of vaccine (for a total of 4 doses) should be administered 

according to a recommended schedule on the basis of the 

mother’s HBsAg test result. The final dose in the series 

should not be administered before age 24 weeks (164 days).

 – If it is not possible to determine the mother’s HBsAg 

status (e.g., when a parent or person with lawful custody 

safely surrenders an infant confidentially shortly after 

birth), the vaccine series should be completed according 

to a recommended schedule for infants born to HBsAg-

positive mothers (new recommendation). The final 

dose in the series should not be administered before 

age 24 weeks (164 days). These infants should receive 

postvaccination serologic testing at age 9–12 months, 

and revaccination if necessary (new recommendation).

• Anti-HBs testing should be performed using a method 

that allows detection of the protective concentration of 

anti-HBs (≥10 mIU/mL). Testing should not be performed 

before age nine months to avoid detection of passive anti-

HBs from HBIG administered at birth and to maximize 

the likelihood of detecting late HBV infection. Anti-HBc 

testing of infants is not recommended because passively 

acquired maternal anti-HBc might be detected in infants 

born to HBsAg-positive mothers up to age 24 months.

 – HBsAg-negative infants with anti-HBs levels ≥10 mIU/mL 

are protected and need no further medical management.

 – HBsAg-negative infants with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL 

should be revaccinated with a single dose of HepB 

vaccine and receive postvaccination serologic testing 

1–2 months later (new recommendation). Infants 

whose anti-HBs remains &lt;10 mIU/mL following single 

dose revaccination should receive two additional doses 

of HepB vaccine to complete the second series, followed 

by postvaccination serologic testing 1–2 months after 

the final dose.

 – Based on clinical circumstances or family preference, 

HBsAg-negative infants with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL may 

instead be revaccinated with a second, complete 3-dose 

series, followed by postvaccination serologic testing 

performed 1–2 months after the final dose of vaccine.

 – Available data do not suggest a benefit from 

administering additional HepB vaccine doses to infants 

who have not attained anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL 

following receipt of two complete HepB vaccine series.

 – HBsAg-positive infants should be referred for 

appropriate follow-up.

• Infants born to mothers with unknown HBsAg status may 

be breastfed beginning immediately after birth.

• For infants transferred to a different facility after birth 

(e.g., a hospital with a higher level of neonatal care), staff 

at the transferring and receiving facilities should 

communicate regarding the infant’s HepB vaccination and 

HBIG receipt status to ensure prophylaxis is administered 

in a timely manner (new recommendation).

Persons Recommended for 

HepB Vaccination

Universal Vaccination of Infants

• All infants should receive the HepB vaccine series as part 

of the recommended childhood immunization schedule, 

beginning at birth as a safety net (Box 4; Table 3).

• For all medically stable infants weighing ≥2,000 grams at 

birth and born to HBsAg-negative mothers, the first dose 

of vaccine should be administered within 24 hours of birth 

(new recommendation). Only single-antigen HepB 

vaccine should be used for the birth dose.

• Infants weighing &lt;2,000 grams and born to HBsAg-

negative mothers should have their first vaccine dose 

delayed to the time of  hospital discharge or age 1 month 

(even if weight is still &lt;2,000 grams). For these infants, a 

copy of the original laboratory report indicating that the 

mother was HBsAg negative during this pregnancy should 

be placed in the infant’s medical record. Infants weighing 


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

17

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

&lt;2,000 grams at birth have a decreased response to HepB 

vaccine administered before age 1 month (118).

• For infants transferred to a different facility after birth 

(e.g., a hospital with a higher level of neonatal care), staff 

at the transferring and receiving facilities should 

communicate regarding the infant’s HepB vaccination and 

HBIG receipt status to ensure prophylaxis is administered 

in a timely manner (new recommendation).

• The final dose in the vaccine series should not be 

administered before age 24 weeks (164 days).

• In populations with currently or previously high rates of 

childhood HBV infection (e.g., Alaska Natives; Pacific 

Islanders; and immigrant families from Asia, Africa, and 

countries with intermediate or high endemic rates of 

infection), the first dose of HepB vaccine should be 

administered at birth and the final dose at age 6–12 months.

Vaccination of Children and Adolescents

• HepB vaccination is recommended for all unvaccinated 

children and adolescents aged &lt;19 years (Box 4).

• Children and adolescents who have not previously received 

HepB vaccine should be vaccinated routinely at any age 

(i.e., children and adolescents are recommended for 

catch-up vaccination) (Table 4).

Vaccination of Adults

• HepB vaccination is recommended for all unvaccinated 

adults at risk for HBV infection and for all adults requesting 

protection from HBV infection. Acknowledgement of a 

specific risk factor should not be a requirement for 

vaccination (Box 4).

• Adults recommended to receive HepB vaccine:

 – Persons at risk for infection by sexual exposure (e.g., 

sex partners of HBsAg-positive persons, sexually active 

persons who are not in a mutually monogamous 

relationship [e.g., persons with more than one sex 

partner during the previous 6 months], persons seeking 

evaluation or treatment for a sexually transmitted 

infection, and MSM).

 – Persons with a history of current or recent injection-

drug use are at increased risk for HBV infection. An 

increased incidence of HBV incidence among young 

adults in rural U.S. communities has been associated 

with an increase in injection-drug use.

 – Other persons at risk for infection by percutaneous or 

mucosal exposure to blood (household contacts of 

HBsAg-positive persons; residents and staff of facilities 

for developmentally disabled persons; health care and 

public safety personnel with reasonably anticipated risk 

for exposure to blood or blood-contaminated body 

fluids; hemodialysis patients and predialysis, peritoneal 

dialysis, and home dialysis patients; persons with 

diabetes mellitus aged &lt;60 years and persons with 

diabetes mellitus aged ≥60 years at the discretion of the 

treating clinician).

 – Others (international travelers to countries with high 

or intermediate levels [HBsAg prevalence of ≥2%] 

[Box 3] of endemic HBV infection, persons with HCV 

infection, persons with chronic liver disease [including, 

but not limited to, those with cirrhosis, fatty liver 

disease, alcoholic liver disease, autoimmune hepatitis, 

and an ALT or AST level greater than twice the upper 

limit of normal] [new recommendation], persons with 

HIV infection, incarcerated persons, all other persons 

seeking protection from HBV infection without 

acknowledgement of a specific risk factor).

Vaccination of Pregnant Women

• Pregnant women who are identified as being at risk for 

HBV infection during pregnancy (e.g., having more than 

one sex partner during the previous 6 months, been 

evaluated or treated for an STI, recent or current injection-

drug use, or having had an HBsAg-positive sex partner) 

should be vaccinated.

• Pregnant women at risk for HBV infection during 

pregnancy should be counseled concerning other methods 

to prevent HBV infection.

Implementation Strategies

Delivery Hospital Policies and Procedures

• All delivery hospitals and birthing facilities should implement 

policies and procedures to ensure identification of infants 

born to HBsAg-positive mothers and infants born to mothers 

with unknown HBsAg status, initiation of prophylaxis for 

these infants, and routine birth dose for medically stable 

infants weighing ≥2,000 grams within 24 hours of birth. Such 

policies and procedures should include standing orders and 

electronic medical record reminders or prompts.

Case-Management Programs to Prevent Perinatal 

HBV Infection

• States and localities should establish case-management 

programs, including appropriate policies, procedures, laws, 

and regulations to ensure that all pregnant women are 

tested for HBsAg during each pregnancy, and that those 

who are HBsAg-positive are tested for HBV DNA to guide 

maternal antiviral therapy. Infants born to HBsAg-positive 

women and women with unknown HBsAg status also 

should receive case management.


Recommendations and Reports

18 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Settings Providing Services to Adults

• In settings in which a high proportion of persons have risk 

factors for HBV infection (e.g., health care settings 

targeting services to injection-drug users, correctional 

facilities, institutions and nonresidential day care facilities 

for developmentally disabled persons), all adults should 

be assumed to be at risk for HBV infection and should be 

offered HepB vaccination if they have not previously 

completed vaccination.

• HCP should implement standing orders to administer 

HepB vaccine as part of routine services to adults who 

have not completed the vaccine series and make HepB 

vaccination a standard component of evaluation and 

treatment for STIs and HIV/AIDS.

• When feasible, HepB vaccination should be offered in 

outreach and other settings in which services are provided 

to persons at risk for HBV infection (e.g., needle-exchange 

programs, HIV testing sites, HIV prevention programs, 

and homeless shelters).

• In medical settings, HCP should implement standing orders 

to identify adults recommended for HepB vaccination and 

administer vaccination as part of routine services.

Postexposure Prophylaxis

This section provides recommendations for management 

of persons who are exposed to HBV through a distinct, 

identifiable exposure to blood or body fluids that contain 

blood, in occupational and nonoccupational settings.

• Wounds and skin sites that have been in contact with blood 

or body fluids should be washed with soap and water; mucous 

membranes should be flushed with water. Using antiseptics 

(e.g., 2%–4% chlorhexidine) for wound care or expressing 

fluid by squeezing the wound further have not been shown 

to reduce the risk for HBV transmission; however, the use of 

antiseptics is not contraindicated. The application of caustic 

agents (e.g., bleach) or the injection of antiseptics or 

disinfectants into the wound is not recommended.

Occupational Settings

Vaccinated HCP

• For vaccinated HCP (who have written documentation 

of a complete HepB vaccine series) with subsequent 

documented anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL, testing the source 

patient for HBsAg is unnecessary. No postexposure 

prophylaxis for HBV is necessary, regardless of the source 

patient’s HBsAg status (Table 5).

• For vaccinated HCP (who have written documentation 

of a complete HepB vaccine series) without previous anti-

HBs testing, the HCP should be tested for anti-HBs and 

the source patient (if known) should be tested for HBsAg 

as soon as possible after the exposure. Anti-HBs testing 

should be performed using a method that allows detection 

of the protective concentration of anti-HBs (≥10 mIU/mL). 

Testing the source patient and the HCP should occur 

simultaneously; testing the source patient should not be 

delayed while waiting for the HCP anti-HBs test results, 

and likewise, testing the HCP should not be delayed while 

waiting for the source patient’s HBsAg results (Table 5).

 – If the HCP has anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL and the source 

patient is HBsAg-positive or has an unknown HBsAg 

status, the HCP should receive 1 dose of HBIG and 

be revaccinated as soon as possible after the exposure. 

HepB vaccine may be administered simultaneously 

with HBIG at a separate anatomical injection site (e.g., 

separate limb). The HCP should then receive the 

second 2 doses of HepB vaccine to complete the second 

series (likely 6 doses total when accounting for the 

original series) according to the vaccination schedule. 

So the HCP’s vaccine response status can be documented 

TABLE 5. Postexposure management of health care personnel after occupational percutaneous or mucosal exposure to blood or body fluids, 

by health care personnel HepB vaccination and response status

HCP status

Postexposure testing

Postexposure prophylaxis

Postvaccination 

serologic testing

Source patient 

(HBsAg)

HCP testing (anti-HBs)

HBIG

Vaccination

Documented responder after complete series

No action needed

Documented nonresponder after two 

complete series

Positive/unknown

-*

HBIG x2 separated by 

1 month

-

N/A

Negative

No action needed

Response unknown after complete series

Positive/unknown

&lt;10 mIU/mL

HBIG x1

Initiate revaccination

Yes

Negative

&lt;10 mIU/mL

None

Initiate revaccination

Yes

Any result

≥10 mIU/mL

No action needed

Unvaccinated/incompletely vaccinated or 

vaccine refusers

Positive/unknown

-

HBIG x1

Complete vaccination

Yes

Negative

-

None

Complete vaccination

Yes

Abbreviations: anti HBs = antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen; HBIG = hepatitis B immune globulin; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HCP = health care 

personnel; N/A = not applicable.

* Not indicated.


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

19

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

for future exposures, anti-HBs testing should be 

performed 1–2 months after the final vaccine dose.

 – If the HCP has anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL and the source 

patient is HBsAg-negative, the HCP should receive an 

additional single HepB vaccine dose, followed by repeat 

anti-HBs testing 1–2 months later. HCP whose anti-

HBs remains &lt;10 mIU/mL should undergo 

revaccination with two more doses (likely 6 doses total 

when accounting for the original series). So the HCP’s 

vaccine response status can be documented for future 

exposures, anti-HBs testing should be performed 

1–2 months after the final dose of vaccine.

 – If the HCP has anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL at the time of 

the exposure, no postexposure HBV management is 

necessary, regardless of the source patient’s HBsAg status.

• For vaccinated HCP with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL after 

two complete HepB vaccine series, the source patient 

should be tested for HBsAg as soon as possible after the 

exposure. If the source patient is HBsAg-positive or has 

unknown HBsAg status, the HCP should receive 2 doses 

of HBIG (1,10). The first dose should be administered as 

soon as possible after the exposure, and the second dose 

should be administered 1 month later. HepB vaccine is 

not recommended for the exposed HCP who has 

previously completed two HepB vaccine series. If the 

source patient is HBsAg-negative, neither HBIG nor HepB 

vaccine is necessary (Table 5).

Unvaccinated HCP

• For unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated HCP, the 

source patient should be tested for HBsAg as soon as 

possible after the exposure. Testing unvaccinated or 

incompletely vaccinated HCP for anti-HBs is not 

necessary and is potentially misleading, because anti-HBs 

≥10 mIU/mL as a correlate of vaccine-induced protection 

has only been determined for persons who have completed 

an approved vaccination series (107) (Table 5).

• If the source patient is HBsAg-positive or has an unknown 

HBsAg status, the HCP should receive 1 dose of HBIG 

and 1 dose of HepB vaccine administered as soon as 

possible after the exposure. HepB vaccine may be 

administered simultaneously with HBIG at a separate 

anatomical injection site (e.g., separate limb). The HCP 

should complete the HepB vaccine series according to the 

vaccination schedule. To document the HCP’s vaccine 

response status for future exposures, anti-HBs testing 

should be performed approximately 1–2 months after the 

final vaccine dose. Anti-HBs testing should be performed 

using a method that allows detection of the protective 

concentration of anti-HBs (≥10 mIU/mL). Because 

anti-HBs testing of HCP who received HBIG should be 

performed after anti-HBs from HBIG is no longer 

detectable (6 months after administration), it might be 

necessary to defer anti-HBs testing for a period longer 

than 1–2 months after the last vaccine dose in these 

situations (Table 5).

 – HCP with anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL after receipt of the 

primary vaccine series are considered immune. 

Immunocompetent persons have long-term protection 

and do not need further periodic testing to assess anti-

HBs levels.

 – HCP with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL after receipt of the 

primary series should be revaccinated. For these HCP, 

administration of a second complete series on an 

appropriate schedule, followed by anti-HBs testing 

1–2 months after the final dose, is usually more 

practical than conducting serologic testing after each 

additional dose of vaccine. So the HCP’s vaccine 

response status can be documented for future exposures, 

anti-HBs testing should be performed 1–2 months after 

the final vaccine dose.

• If the source patient is HBsAg-negative, the HCP should 

complete the HepB vaccine series according to the 

vaccination schedule. So the HCP’s vaccine response status 

can be documented for future exposures, anti-HBs testing 

should be performed approximately 1–2 months after the 

final vaccine dose (Table 5).

 – HCP with anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL after receipt of the 

primary vaccine series are considered immune. 

Immunocompetent persons have long-term protection 

and do not need further periodic testing to assess anti-

HBs levels.

 – HCP with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL after receipt of the 

primary series should be revaccinated. For these HCP, 

administration of a second complete series on an 

appropriate schedule, followed by anti-HBs testing 

1–2 months after the final dose, is usually more practical 

than conducting serologic testing after each additional 

dose of vaccine. So the HCP’s vaccine response status 

can be documented for future exposures, anti-HBs 

testing should be performed 1–2 months after the final 

vaccine dose.

Clinical Management of Exposed HCP

• HCP who have anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL (or who are 

unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated) and sustain an 

exposure to a source patient who is HBsAg-positive or has 

an unknown HBsAg status should undergo baseline testing 

for HBV infection as soon as possible after the exposure, 

and follow-up testing approximately 6 months later. Testing 


Recommendations and Reports

20 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

immediately after the exposure should consist of total anti-

HBc, and follow-up testing approximately 6 months later 

should consist of HBsAg and total anti-HBc.

• HCP exposed to a source patient who is HBsAg-positive 

or has an unknown HBsAg status do not need to take 

special precautions to prevent secondary transmission 

during the follow-up period; however, they should refrain 

from donating blood, plasma, organs, tissue, or semen 

(10). The exposed HCP does not need to modify sexual 

practices or refrain from becoming pregnant (10). If an 

exposed HCP is breastfeeding, she does not need to 

discontinue (7,10). No modifications to an exposed HCP’s 

patient-care responsibilities are necessary to prevent 

transmission to patients based solely on exposure to a 

source patient who is HBsAg-positive or has an unknown 

HBsAg status.

Previously Vaccinated HCP

• Providers should only accept written, dated records as 

evidence of HepB vaccination (151).

• An increasing number of HCP have received routine HepB 

vaccination during childhood. No postvaccination 

serologic testing is recommended after routine infant or 

adolescent HepB vaccination. Because vaccine-induced 

anti-HBs wanes over time, testing HCP for anti-HBs years 

after vaccination might not distinguish vaccine 

nonresponders from responders. Pre-exposure assessment 

of current or past anti-HBs results upon hire or 

matriculation, followed by one or more additional doses 

of HepB vaccine for HCP with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL 

and retesting anti-HBs, if necessary, helps to ensure that 

HCP will be protected if they have an exposure to HBV-

containing blood or body fluids (Box 5; Figure 3).

 – HCP who cannot provide documentation of 3 doses 

of HepB vaccine should be considered unvaccinated 

and should complete the vaccine series. Postvaccination 

serologic testing for anti-HBs is recommended 

1–2 months after the third vaccine dose. HCP who are 

inadvertently tested before receiving 3 documented 

doses of HepB vaccine and have anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL 

should not be considered immune because anti-HBs 

≥10 mIU/mL is a known correlate of protection only 

when testing follows a documented 3-dose series. 

Health care facilities are encouraged to try to locate 

vaccine records for HCP and to enter all vaccine doses 

in their state immunization information system.

Nonoccupational Settings

HBsAg-Positive Source

This section provides recommendations for management 

of persons who are exposed to HBV through a distinct, 

identifiable exposure to blood or body fluids that contain 

blood, in nonoccupational settings (Table 6). The exposed 

person does not need to undergo postvaccination serologic 

testing following vaccination based solely on being exposed.

• Exposed persons who have written documentation of a complete 

HepB vaccine series and who did not receive postvaccination 

testing should receive a single dose of HepB vaccine.

• Exposed persons who are in the process of being vaccinated 

but who have not completed the vaccine series should receive 

a dose of HBIG and complete the HepB vaccine series (it 

is not necessary to restart the HepB vaccine series). HepB 

vaccine may be administered simultaneously with HBIG 

at a separate anatomical injection site (e.g., separate limb).

• Exposed unvaccinated persons should receive both HBIG 

and HepB vaccine as soon as possible after exposure 

(preferably within 24 hours). HepB vaccine may be 

administered simultaneously with HBIG at a separate 

anatomical injection site (e.g., separate limbs). Studies are 

limited on the maximum interval after exposure during 

which postexposure prophylaxis is effective, but the 

interval is unlikely to exceed 7 days for percutaneous 

exposure and 14 days for sexual exposures. The HepB 

vaccine series should be completed according to the 

vaccination schedule.

HBsAg-Unknown Source

• Exposed persons with written documentation of a 

complete HepB vaccine series require no further treatment.

• Exposed persons who are in the process of being vaccinated 

but who are not fully vaccinated should complete the 

HepB vaccine series (it is not necessary to restart the 

vaccination series).

• Exposed unvaccinated persons should receive the HepB 

vaccine series with the first dose administered as soon as 

possible after exposure, preferably within 24 hours. Studies 

are limited on the maximum interval after exposure during 

which postexposure prophylaxis is effective, but the interval 

is unlikely to exceed 7 days for percutaneous exposure and 

14 days for sexual exposures. The vaccine series should be 

completed according to the vaccination schedule.


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

21

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Immunization Management Issues

Prevaccination Testing

• Vaccination of persons immune to HBV because of current 

or previous infection or HepB vaccination does not 

increase the risk for adverse events (8). However, in 

populations that have high rates of previous HBV 

infection, prevaccination testing might reduce costs by 

avoiding vaccination of persons who are already immune. 

Prevaccination testing consists of testing for HBsAg, anti-

HBs, and anti-HBc. Serologic testing should not be a 

barrier to vaccination of susceptible persons, especially in 

populations that are difficult to access. Testing is not a 

requirement for vaccination, and in settings where testing 

is not feasible, vaccination of recommended persons 

should continue.

• The first dose of HepB vaccine should typically be 

administered immediately after collection of the blood for 

serologic testing. Prevaccination testing is recommended 

for the following persons (Box 6):

 – household, sexual, or needle-sharing contacts of 

HBsAg-positive persons;

 – HIV-positive persons;

 – persons with elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT)/

aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of unknown etiology;

 – hemodialysis patients (refer to 2001 CDC 

recommendations [88] for additional information);

 – MSM; and

 – past or current injection-drug users.

Testing for HBV Infection

• Testing for HBV infection (consisting of testing for 

HBsAg, anti-HBs, and anti-HBc) is also recommended 

for the following persons:

 – persons born in countries of high and intermediate 

HBV endemicity (HBsAg prevalence ≥2%);

 – U.S.-born persons not vaccinated as infants whose 

parents were born in countries with high HBV 

endemicity (≥8%);

 – persons needing immunosuppressive therapy, including 

chemotherapy, immunosuppression related to organ 

transplantation, and immunosuppression for 

rheumatologic or gastroenterologic disorders; and

 – donors of blood, plasma, organs, tissues, or semen.

• All pregnant women should be tested for HBsAg 

during each pregnancy. Pregnant women with positive 

HBsAg tests should be tested for HBV DNA.

Postvaccination Serologic Testing

• Serologic testing for immunity is not necessary after 

routine vaccination of infants, children, or adults.

• Testing for anti-HBs after vaccination is recommended 

for the following persons whose subsequent clinical 

management depends on knowledge of their immune 

status (Box 7):

 – infants born to HBsAg-positive women and infants 

born to women whose HBsAg status remains unknown 

BOX 5. Testing anti-HBs for health care personnel (HCP) vaccinated 

in the past

The issue: An increasing number of HCP have received 

routine hepatitis B (HepB) vaccination during childhood. 

No postvaccination serologic testing is recommended after 

routine infant or adolescent HepB vaccination. Because 

vaccine-induced antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen 

(anti-HBs) wanes over time, testing HCP for anti-HBs 

years after vaccination might not distinguish vaccine 

nonresponders from responders.

Guidance for health care institutions: Health 

care institutions may measure anti-HBs upon hire or 

matriculation for HCP who have documentation of a 

complete HepB vaccine series in the past (e.g., as part 

of routine infant or adolescent vaccination). HCP with 

anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL should receive one or more 

additional doses of HepB vaccine and retesting (Figure 3). 

Institutions that decide to not measure anti-HBs upon hire 

or matriculation for HCP who have documentation of a 

complete HepB vaccine series in the past should ensure 

timely assessment and postexposure prophylaxis following 

an exposure (Table 5).

Considerations: The risk for occupational HBV 

infection for vaccinated HCP might be low enough in 

certain settings so that assessment of anti-HBs status 

and appropriate follow-up should be done at the time of 

exposure to potentially infectious blood or body fluids. This 

approach relies on HCP recognizing and reporting blood 

and body fluid exposures and therefore may be applied 

on the basis of documented low risk, implementation, 

and cost considerations. Certain HCP occupations have 

lower risk for occupational blood and body fluid exposures 

(e.g., occupations involving counseling versus performing 

procedures), and nontrainees have lower risks for blood 

and body fluid exposures than trainees. Some settings 

also will have a lower prevalence of HBV infection in the 

patient population served than in other settings, which will 

influence the risk for HCP exposure to HBsAg-positive 

blood and body fluids.


Recommendations and Reports

22 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

FIGURE 3. Pre-exposure evaluation for health care personnel previously vaccinated with complete, ≥3-dose HepB vaccine series who have 

not had postvaccination serologic testing* 

Measure antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs)

anti-HBs 

≥10 mIU/mL

anti-HBs 

&lt;10 mIU/mL

anti-HBs 

&lt;10 mIU/mL

anti-HBs 

≥10 mIU/mL

Administer 1 dose of HepB vaccine,

postvaccination serologic testing

Administer 2 more doses 

of HepB vaccine, 

postvaccination serologic testing

anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL

anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL

No action for 

hepatitis B prophylaxis

(regardless of source patient 

hepatitis B surface antigen status)

Health care 

personnel need 

to receive

hepatitis B 

evaluation for 

all exposures

Source: Adapted from CDC. A comprehensive immunization strategy to eliminate transmission of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: recommendations 

of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). Part II: immunization of adults. MMWR 2006;55(No. RR-16).

* Should be performed 1–2 months after the last dose of vaccine using a quantitative method that allows detection of the protective concentration of anti-HBs 

(≥10 mIU/mL) (e.g., enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]).


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

23

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

TABLE 6. Postexposure management after distinct nonoccupational percutaneous or mucosal exposure to blood or body fluids

Exposure*

Management

Unvaccinated person

Previously vaccinated person

HBsAg-positive source

HepB vaccine series and HBIG

HepB vaccine dose

HBsAg status unknown for source

Hep B vaccine series

No management

Abbreviations: HepB = hepatitis B; HBsAg = hepatitis B surface antigen; HBIG = hepatitis B immune globulin.

* Exposures include percutaneous (e.g., bite or needlestick) or mucosal exposure to blood or body fluids, sex or needle-sharing contact, or victim of sexual assault/abuse.

(e.g., infants safely surrendered shortly after birth). 

Postvaccination serologic testing should consist of 

testing for anti-HBs and HBsAg;

 – HCP and public safety workers at risk for blood or 

body fluid exposure;

 – hemodialysis patients (and other persons who might 

require outpatient hemodialysis), HIV-infected 

persons, and other immunocompromised persons (e.g., 

hematopoietic stem-cell transplant recipients or persons 

receiving chemotherapy), to determine the need for 

revaccination and the type of follow-up testing; and

 – sex partners of HBsAg-positive persons, to determine 

the need for revaccination and for other methods of 

protection against HBV infection.

• Testing should be performed 1–2 months after 

administration of the final dose of the vaccine series using 

a method that allows determination of a protective 

concentration of anti-HBs (≥10 mIU/mL).

 – Persons found to have anti-HBs concentrations of 

≥10 mIU/mL after the primary vaccine series are 

considered to be immune.

 – Immunocompetent persons have long-term protection and 

do not need further periodic testing to assess anti-HBs levels.

 – Immunocompromised persons might need annual testing 

to assess anti-HBs concentrations (See Revaccination).

 – Persons found to have anti-HBs concentrations of 

&lt;10 mIU/mL after the primary vaccine series should 

be revaccinated. Administration of all doses in the 

second series, on an appropriate schedule, followed by 

anti-HBs testing 1–2 months after the final dose, is 

usually more practical than serologic testing after one 

or more doses of vaccine (except for when revaccinating 

infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers).

 – Persons who do not have a protective concentration of 

anti-HBs after revaccination should be tested for HBsAg.

 – If the HBsAg test result is positive, the person should 

receive appropriate management, and any household, 

sexual, or needle-sharing contacts should be identified and 

vaccinated. Prevaccination testing (consisting of anti-HBc, 

HBsAg, and anti-HBs) to identify infected persons is 

recommended for household, sexual, or needle-sharing 

contacts of HBsAg-positive persons; serologic testing 

should not be a barrier to vaccination, and the first HepB 

vaccine dose should be administered immediately after 

collection of the blood for serologic testing.

 – Persons who test negative for HBsAg should be 

considered susceptible to HBV infection and should 

be counseled about precautions to prevent HBV 

infection and the need to obtain HBIG postexposure 

prophylaxis for any known or likely exposure to an 

HBsAg-positive source (10).

• Testing HCP with documentation of complete HepB 

vaccination for anti-HBs upon hire or matriculation (i.e., 

pre-exposure assessment of prior response to HepB 

vaccination), followed by one or more additional doses of 

HepB vaccine for HCP with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL, helps 

to ensure that HCP will be protected if they have an 

exposure to HBV-containing blood or body fluids.

• Anti-HBs levels of ≥10 mIU/mL are generally considered 

seroprotective; however, different assays have different 

assay cutoff values based on which reported levels of anti-

HBs might vary depending on the assay used. Refer to the 

package insert of the test for the determination of actual/

correct levels of anti-HBs antibodies.

Revaccination

• Revaccination (i.e., booster dose, challenge dose, or 

revaccination with a complete series) is not generally 

recommended for persons with a normal immune status 

who were vaccinated as infants, children, adolescents, or 

adults. Available data do not suggest a maximum number 

of booster doses. Revaccination when anti-HBs is 

&lt;10 mIU/mL is recommended for the following persons:

 – Infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers. HBsAg-

negative infants with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL should 

be revaccinated with a single dose of HepB vaccine, 

and retested 1–2 months later. Infants whose anti-HBs 

remains &lt;10 mIU/mL following single dose 

revaccination should receive two additional doses of 

HepB vaccine on a vaccine schedule to complete the 

second series, followed by anti-HBs testing 1–2 months 

later. Alternatively, these infants may be revaccinated 

with a second 3-dose series and retested (HBsAg and 

anti-HBs) 1–2 months after the final dose of vaccine.


Recommendations and Reports

24 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

BOX 6. Persons recommended to receive serologic testing prior 

to vaccination*

• Household, sexual, or needle contacts of hepatitis B 

surface antigen (HBsAg)–positive persons†

• HIV-positive persons†

• Persons with elevated alanine aminotransferase/

aspartate aminotransferase of unknown etiology†

• Hemodialysis patients†

• Men who have sex with men†

• Past or current persons who inject drugs†

• Persons born in countries of high and intermediate 

hepatitis B virus (HBV) endemicity (HBsAg 

prevalence ≥2%)

• U.S.-born persons not vaccinated as infants whose 

parents were born in countries with high HBV 

endemicity (≥8%)

• Persons needing immunosuppressive therapy, 

including chemotherapy, immunosuppression related 

to organ transplantation, and immunosuppression for 

rheumatologic or gastroenterologic disorders

• Donors of blood, plasma, organs, tissues, or semen

* Serologic testing comprises testing for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), 

antibody to HBsAg, and antibody to hepatitis B core antigen.

† Denotes persons also recommended for hepatitis B vaccination. Serologic 

testing should occur prior to vaccination. Serologic testing should not be a 

barrier to vaccination of susceptible persons. The first dose of vaccine should 

typically be administered immediately after collection of the blood for 

serologic testing.

 – HCP. Completely vaccinated HCP with anti-HBs 

&lt;10 mIU/mL should receive an additional dose of HepB 

vaccine, followed by anti-HBs testing 1–2 months later. 

HCP whose anti-HBs remains &lt;10 mIU/mL should 

complete the second series (usually 6 doses total), followed 

by repeat anti-HBs testing 1–2 months after the final dose. 

Alternatively, it might be more practical for very recently 

vaccinated HCP with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL to receive 

the second complete series (usually 6 doses total), followed 

by anti-HBs testing 1–2 months after the final dose.

 – Hemodialysis patients. For hemodialysis patients 

treated in outpatient centers, the need for booster doses 

should be assessed by annual anti-HBs testing. A 

booster dose should be administered when anti-HBs 

levels decline to &lt;10 mIU/mL. Anti-HBs testing 

1–2 months following the booster dose to assess 

response is not recommended.

 – Other immunocompromised persons. For other 

immunocompromised persons (e.g., HIV-infected 

persons, hematopoietic stem-cell transplant recipients, and 

persons receiving chemotherapy), the need for booster 

doses has not been determined. Annual anti-HBs testing 

and booster doses should be considered for persons with 

an ongoing risk for exposure.

Interrupted Schedules and Minimum  

Dosing Intervals

• For all ages, when the HepB vaccine schedule is 

interrupted, the vaccine series does not need to be 

restarted. If the series is interrupted after the first dose, 

the second dose should be administered as soon as possible, 

and the second and third doses should be separated by an 

interval of at least 8 weeks. If only the third dose has been 

delayed, it should be administered as soon as possible. The 

final dose of vaccine must be administered at least 8 weeks 

after the second dose and should follow the first dose by 

at least 16 weeks; the minimum interval between the first 

and second doses is 4 weeks. Inadequate doses of 

HepB vaccine or doses received after a shorter-than-

recommended dosing interval should be readministered, 

using the correct dosage or schedule.

• Vaccine doses administered ≤4 days before the minimum 

interval or age are considered valid. Because of the unique 

accelerated schedule for Twinrix, the 4-day guideline does 

not apply to the first 3 doses of this vaccine when 

administered on a 0-day, 7-day, 21–30-day, and 12-month 

schedule (new recommendation).

• In infants, administration of the final dose is not 

recommended before age 24 weeks.

Other Immunization Management Issues

• No differences in immunogenicity have been observed 

when one or 2 doses of HepB vaccine produced by one 

manufacturer are followed by doses from a different 

manufacturer (8). Whenever feasible, the same vaccine 

should be used for the subsequent doses; however, if a 

different brand is administered, the dose should be 

considered valid and does not need to be repeated.

• Providers should only accept dated records as evidence of 

HepB vaccination.

• Although vaccinations should not be postponed if records 

cannot be found, an attempt to locate missing records 

should be made by contacting previous health care 

providers, reviewing state or local immunization 

information systems, and searching for a personally held 

record. If records cannot be located within a reasonable 

time, these persons should be considered susceptible and 

started on the age-appropriate vaccination schedule. An 

anti-HBs ≥10 mIU/mL is a serologic correlate of protection 

only when following a documented, complete series.


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

25

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

BOX 7. Persons recommended to receive postvaccination serologic 

testing* following a complete series of HepB vaccination

• Infants born to hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)–

positive mothers or mothers whose HBsAg status 

remains unknown (e.g., when a parent or person with 

lawful custody safely surrenders an infant confidentially 

shortly after birth infants safely surrendered at or 

shortly after birth)†

• Health care personnel and public safety workers

• Hemodialysis patients and others who might require 

outpatient hemodialysis (e.g., predialysis, peritoneal 

dialysis, and home dialysis)

• HIV-infected persons

• Other immunocompromised persons (e.g., 

hematopoietic stem-cell transplant recipients or 

persons receiving chemotherapy)

• Sex partners of HBsAg-positive persons

* Postvaccination serologic testing for persons other than infants born to 

HBsAg-positive (or HBsAg-unknown) mothers consists of anti-HBs.

† Postvaccination serologic testing for infants born to HBsAg-positive (or 

HBsAg-unknown) mothers consists of anti-HBs and HBsAg. Persons 

with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL after the primary vaccine series should be 

revaccinated. Infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers or mothers with 

an unknown HBsAg status should be revaccinated with a single dose of 

HepB vaccine and receive postvaccination serologic testing 1–2 months 

later. Infants whose anti-HBs remains &lt;10 mIU/mL following single dose 

revaccination should receive two additional doses of HepB vaccine, 

followed by postvaccination serologic testing 1–2 months after the final 

dose. Based on clinical circumstances or family preference, HBsAg-

negative infants with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL may instead be revaccinated 

with a second, complete 3-dose series, followed by postvaccination 

serologic testing performed 1–2 months after the final dose of vaccine. 

For others with anti-HBs &lt;10 mIU/mL after the primary series, 

administration of 3 additional HepB vaccine doses on an appropriate 

schedule, followed by anti-HBs testing 1–2 months after the final dose, 

is usually more practical than serologic testing after ≥1 dose of vaccine.

• In all settings, vaccination should be initiated even though 

completion of the series might not be ensured.

• Adverse events occurring after administration of any vaccine 

should be reported to VAERS. Reports should be submitted 

to VAERS online, by facsimile, or by mail. More information 

about VAERS is available by calling 1-800-822-7967 (toll-

free) or online at https://vaers.hhs.gov.

Future Directions

ACIP and CDC will review these recommendations as new 

epidemiology or other information related to HepB vaccines 

(including licensure of additional HepB-containing vaccines), 

HepB vaccine adverse events, and the experience gained in the 

implementation of these recommendations becomes available. 

Revised recommendations will be developed as needed.

Acknowledgments

Mona Doshani, Alaya Koneru, Henry Roberts, PhD, Division of 

Viral Hepatitis, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, 

STD, and TB Prevention, CDC.

References

 1. CDC. Updated U.S. Public Health Service guidelines for the 

management of occupational exposures to HBV, HCV, and HIV and 

recommendations for postexposure prophylaxis. MMWR Recomm Rep 

2001;50(No. RR-11):1–52.

 2. Preboth M. PHS guidelines for management of occupational exposure 

to HBV, HCV and HIV: management of occupational blood exposures. 

Am Fam Physician 2001;64:2012–4.

 3. Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard JE. 

Survival of hepatitis B virus after drying and storage for one week. Lancet 

1981;317:550–1. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(81)92877-4

 4. CDC. Viral hepatitis—statistics and surveillance. Atlanta, GA: US 

Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2017. https://www.

cdc.gov/hepatitis/statistics/

 5. Terrault NA, Bzowej NH, Chang KM, Hwang JP, Jonas MM, 

Murad MH; American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. 

AASLD guidelines for treatment of chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology 

2016;63:261–83. https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.28156

 6. Rubin LG, Levin MJ, Ljungman P, et al.; Infectious Diseases Society of 

America. 2013 IDSA clinical practice guideline for vaccination of the 

immunocompromised host. Clin Infect Dis 2014;58:e44–100. https://

doi.org/10.1093/cid/cit684

 7. Mast EE, Margolis HS, Fiore AE, et al.; Advisory Committee on 

Immunization Practices (ACIP). A comprehensive immunization strategy 

to eliminate transmission of hepatitis B virus infection in the United 

States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 

Practices (ACIP). Part 1: immunization of infants, children, and 

adolescents. MMWR Recomm Rep 2005;54(No. RR-16):1–31.

 8. Mast EE, Weinbaum CM, Fiore AE, et al. A comprehensive 

immunization strategy to eliminate transmission of hepatitis B virus 

infection in the United States: recommendations of the Advisory 

Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). Part II: immunization 

of adults. MMWR Recomm Rep 2006;55(No. RR-16):1–33.

 9. CDC. Use of hepatitis B vaccination for adults with diabetes mellitus: 

recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 

Practices (ACIP). MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2011;60:1709–11.

 10. Schillie S, Murphy TV, Sawyer M, et al.; CDC. CDC guidance for 

evaluating health-care personnel for hepatitis B virus protection and 

for administering postexposure management. MMWR Recomm Rep 

2013;62(No. RR-10):1–19.

 11. Schillie S, Murphy TV, Fenlon N, Ko S, Ward JW. Update: shortened 

interval for postvaccination serologic testing of infants born to hepatitis 

b-infected mothers. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:1118–20. 

 12. Shimabukuro TT, Nguyen M, Martin D, DeStefano F. Safety monitoring 

in the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Vaccine 

2015;33:4398–405. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.07.035

 13. Zhou W, Pool V, Iskander JK, et al. Surveillance for safety 

after immunization: Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System 

(VAERS)—United States, 1991–2001. MMWR Surveill Summ 

2003;52(No. SS-1):1–24.

 14. McNeil MM, Gee J, Weintraub ES, et al. The Vaccine Safety 

Datalink: successes and challenges monitoring vaccine safety. Vaccine 

2014;32:5390–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.07.073

 15. CDC. Surveillance data for acute viral hepatitis—United States, 2008. 

Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2010. 

https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/statistics/2008surveillance/index.htm


Recommendations and Reports

26 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

 16. Harris AM, Iqbal K, Schillie S, et al. Increases in acute hepatitis B virus 

infections—Kentucky, Tennessee, and West Virginia, 2006–2013. 

MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:47–50.

 17. Roberts H, Kruszon-Moran D, Ly KN, et al. Prevalence of chronic 

hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection in U.S. households: National Health 

and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 1988-2012. Hepatology 

2016;63:388–97. https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.28109

 18. Wasley A, Kruszon-Moran D, Kuhnert W, et al. The prevalence of 

hepatitis B virus infection in the United States in the era of vaccination. 

J Infect Dis 2010;202:192–201. https://doi.org/10.1086/653622

 19. Kowdley KV, Wang CC, Welch S, Roberts H, Brosgart CL. Prevalence 

of chronic hepatitis B among foreign-born persons living in the United 

States by country of origin. Hepatology 2012;56:422–33. https://doi.

org/10.1002/hep.24804

 20. Mitchell T, Armstrong GL, Hu DJ, Wasley A, Painter JA. The 

increasing burden of imported chronic hepatitis B—United States, 

1974–2008. PLoS One 2011;6:e27717. https://doi.org/10.1371/

journal.pone.0027717

 21. CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating 

transmission in the United States through universal childhood 

vaccination. Recommendations of the Immunization Practices Advisory 

Committee (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 1991;40(No. RR-13):1–25.

 22. CDC. Recommendation of the Immunization Practices Advisory 

Committee (ACIP). Inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine. MMWR Morb 

Mortal Wkly Rep 1982;31:317–22, 327–8.

 23. CDC. Changing patterns of groups at high risk for hepatitis B in the 

United States. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1988;37:429–32, 437.

24. CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of transmission of 

human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne 

pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 

1988;37:377–82, 387–8.

25. CDC. Prevention of perinatal transmission of hepatitis B virus: prenatal 

screening of all pregnant women for hepatitis B surface antigen. MMWR 

Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1988;37:341–6, 351.

26. CDC. Update: recommendations to prevent hepatitis B virus 

transmission—United States. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 

1999;48:33–4.

27. Kolasa MS, Tsai Y, Xu J, Fenlon N, Schillie S. Hepatitis B surface antigen 

testing among pregnant women, United States 2014. Pediatr Infect Dis 

J 2017;36:e175–80. https://doi.org/10.1097/INF.0000000000001516

28. Kubo A, Shlager L, Marks AR, et al. Prevention of vertical transmission of 

hepatitis B: an observational study. Ann Intern Med 2014;160:828–35. 

https://doi.org/10.7326/M13-2529

29. Schillie S, Walker T, Veselsky S, et al. Outcomes of infants born to 

women infected with hepatitis B. Pediatrics 2015;135:e1141–7. https://

doi.org/10.1542/peds.2014-3213

30. Hill HA, Elam-Evans LD, Yankey D, Singleton JA, Kang Y. Vaccination 

coverage among children aged 19–35 months—United States, 2016. 

MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:1171–7. https://doi.

org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6643a3

31. CDC. Newborn hepatitis B vaccination coverage among children born 

January 2003-June 2005—United States. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 

Rep 2008;57:825–8.

32. US Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease 

Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy people 2020. Washington, 

DC: US Department of Health and Human Services; 2014. https://

www.healthypeople.gov/

33. Walker TY, Elam-Evans LD, Singleton JA, et al. National, regional, 

state, and selected local area vaccination coverage among adolescents 

aged 13–17 years-United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 

Rep 2017;66:874–82. 

34. Williams WW, Lu PJ, O’Halloran A, et al.; CDC. Surveillance of 

vaccination coverage among adult populations—United States, 2015. 

MMWR Surveill Summ 2017;66(No. SS-11):1–28. 

35. Agerton TB, Mahoney FJ, Polish LB, Shapiro CN. Impact of the 

bloodborne pathogens standard on vaccination of healthcare workers with 

hepatitis B vaccine. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1995;16:287–91. 

https://doi.org/10.2307/30143095

36. Fan L, Owusu-Edusei K Jr, Schillie SF, Murphy TV. Cost-effectiveness of 

testing hepatitis B-positive pregnant women for hepatitis B e antigen or 

viral load. Obstet Gynecol 2014;123:929–37. https://doi.org/10.1097/

AOG.0000000000000124

37. CDC; The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 

Screening pregnant women for hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. 

Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 

2015. https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hbv/pdfs/prenatalhbsagtesting.pdf

38. Pan CQ, Duan ZP, Bhamidimarri KR, et al. An algorithm for risk 

assessment and intervention of mother to child transmission of 

hepatitis B virus. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;10:452–9. https://

doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2011.10.041

39. Pan CQ, Han GR, Jiang HX, et al. Telbivudine prevents vertical 

transmission from HBeAg-positive women with chronic hepatitis B. 

Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;10:520–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

cgh.2012.01.019

40. Chang JJ, Lewin SR. Immunopathogenesis of hepatitis B virus 

infection. Immunol Cell Biol 2007;85:16–23. https://doi.org/10.1038/

sj.icb.7100009

41. Gish RG, Given BD, Lai CL, et al. Chronic hepatitis B: Virology, 

natural history, current management and a glimpse at future 

opportunities. Antiviral Res 2015;121:47–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

antiviral.2015.06.008

42. Hoofnagle JH, Di Bisceglie AM. Serologic diagnosis of acute and 

chronic viral hepatitis. Semin Liver Dis 1991;11:73–83. https://doi.

org/10.1055/s-2008-1040426

43. Krugman S, Overby LR, Mushahwar IK, Ling CM, Frösner GG, 

Deinhardt F. Viral hepatitis, type B. Studies on natural history and 

prevention re-examined. N Engl J Med 1979;300:101–6. https://doi.

org/10.1056/NEJM197901183000301

44. Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M. Principles and practice of pediatric 

infectious diseases. 5th ed. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Elsevier; 2017.

45. Magnius LO, Norder H. Subtypes, genotypes and molecular epidemiology 

of the hepatitis B virus as reflected by sequence variability of the S-gene. 

Intervirology 1995;38:24–34. https://doi.org/10.1159/000150411

46. Kramvis A. Genotypes and genetic variability of hepatitis B virus. 

Intervirology 2014;57:141–50. https://doi.org/10.1159/000360947

47. Kramvis A. The clinical implications of hepatitis B virus genotypes and 

HBeAg in pediatrics. Rev Med Virol 2016;26:285–303. https://doi.

org/10.1002/rmv.1885

48. Allain JP. Occult hepatitis B virus infection. Transfus Clin Biol 

2004;11:18–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tracli.2003.11.007

49. Trépo C, Chan HL, Lok A. Hepatitis B virus infection. Lancet 

2014;384:2053–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60220-8

50. McMahon BJ, Alward WL, Hall DB, et al. Acute hepatitis B 

virus infection: relation of age to the clinical expression of disease 

and subsequent development of the carrier state. J Infect Dis 

1985;151:599–603. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/151.4.599

51. Dienstag JL. Immunopathogenesis of the extrahepatic manifestations 

of hepatitis B virus infection. Springer Semin Immunopathol 

1981;3:461–72. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01951493

52. Beasley RP, Hwang LY, Lee GC, et al. Prevention of perinatally 

transmitted hepatitis B virus infections with hepatitis B immune 

globulin and hepatitis B vaccine. Lancet 1983;322:1099–102. https://

doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(83)90624-4

53. Edmunds WJ, Medley GF, Nokes DJ, Hall AJ, Whittle HC. The 

influence of age on the development of the hepatitis B carrier state. Proc 

Biol Sci 1993;253:197–201. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.1993.0102

54. Hyams KC. Risks of chronicity following acute hepatitis B virus 

infection: a review. Clin Infect Dis 1995;20:992–1000. https://doi.

org/10.1093/clinids/20.4.992


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

27

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

55. Hadler SC, Judson FN, O’Malley PM, et al. Outcome of hepatitis B 

virus infection in homosexual men and its relation to prior human 

immunodeficiency virus infection. J Infect Dis 1991;163:454–7. https://

doi.org/10.1093/infdis/163.3.454

56. Beasley RP, Lin CC, Hwang LY, Chien CS. Hepatocellular carcinoma and 

hepatitis B virus. A prospective study of 22 707 men in Taiwan. Lancet 

1981;318:1129–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(81)90585-7

57. Goldstein ST, Zhou F, Hadler SC, Bell BP, Mast EE, Margolis HS. A 

mathematical model to estimate global hepatitis B disease burden and 

vaccination impact. Int J Epidemiol 2005;34:1329–39. https://doi.

org/10.1093/ije/dyi206

58. McMahon BJ, Alberts SR, Wainwright RB, Bulkow L, Lanier AP. Hepatitis 

B-related sequelae. Prospective study in 1400 hepatitis B surface antigen-

positive Alaska native carriers. Arch Intern Med 1990;150:1051–4. 

https://doi.org/10.1001/archinte.1990.00390170087019

59. Jonas MM, Lok AS, McMahon BJ, et al. Antiviral therapy in management 

of chronic hepatitis B viral infection in children: a systematic review and 

meta-analysis. Hepatology 2016;63:307–18. https://doi.org/10.1002/

hep.28278

60. Lok AS, McMahon BJ, Brown RS Jr, et al. Antiviral therapy for 

chronic hepatitis B viral infection in adults: A systematic review and 

meta-analysis. Hepatology 2016;63:284–306. https://doi.org/10.1002/

hep.28280

61. McMahon BJ. Chronic hepatitis B virus infection. Med Clin North Am 

2014;98:39–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcna.2013.08.004

62. Wang C, Ji D, Chen J, et al. Hepatitis due to reactivation of 

hepatitis B virus in endemic areas among patients with hepatitis C 

treated with direct-acting antiviral agents. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 

2017;15:132–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cgh.2016.06.023

63. Nelson NP, Jamieson DJ, Murphy TV. Prevention of perinatal 

hepatitis B virus transmission. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc 2014;3(Suppl 

1):S7–12. https://doi.org/10.1093/jpids/piu064

64. Schillie SF, Murphy TV. Seroprotection after recombinant hepatitis B 

vaccination among newborn infants: a review. Vaccine 2013;31:2506–16. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.12.012

65. Pondé RA. Atypical serological profiles in hepatitis B virus infection. Eur 

J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2013;32:461–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/

s10096-012-1781-9

66. Pondé RA, Cardoso DD, Ferro MO. The underlying mechanisms for 

the ‘anti-HBc alone’ serological profile. Arch Virol 2010;155:149–58. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00705-009-0559-6

67. Franks AL, Berg CJ, Kane MA, et al. Hepatitis B virus infection 

among children born in the United States to Southeast Asian 

refugees. N Engl J Med 1989;321:1301–5. https://doi.org/10.1056/

NEJM198911093211905

68. Mortensen E, Kamali A, Schirmer PL, et al. Are current screening 

protocols for chronic hepatitis B virus infection adequate? Diagn 

Microbiol Infect Dis 2016;85:159–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

diagmicrobio.2015.12.005

69. Calisti G, Herman O, Powley M, Haque T. Persistence of hepatitis B surface 

antigen in blood in a chronic haemodialysis patient following vaccination 

booster. BMJ Case Rep 2014;2014(jun10 1):bcr2013202191. https://

doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2013-202191

70. Grob P, Jilg W, Bornhak H, et al. Serological pattern “anti-HBc alone”: 

report on a workshop. J Med Virol 2000;62:450–5. https://doi.

org/10.1002/1096-9071(200012)62:4&lt;450::AID-JMV9&gt;3.0.CO;2-Y

71. Silva AE, McMahon BJ, Parkinson AJ, Sjogren MH, Hoofnagle JH, Di 

Bisceglie AM. Hepatitis B virus DNA in persons with isolated antibody 

to hepatitis B core antigen who subsequently received hepatitis B vaccine. 

Clin Infect Dis 1998;26:895–7. https://doi.org/10.1086/513918

72. Candotti D, Lin CK, Belkhiri D, et al. Occult hepatitis B infection 

in blood donors from South East Asia: molecular characterisation and 

potential mechanisms of occurrence. Gut 2012;61:1744–53. https://

doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301281

 73. De Feo TM, Poli F, Mozzi F, Moretti MP, Scalamogna M; Collaborative 

Kidney, Liver and Heart North Italy Transplant Program Study 

Groups. Risk of transmission of hepatitis B virus from anti-HBC 

positive cadaveric organ donors: a collaborative study. Transplant Proc 

2005;37:1238–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.transproceed.2004.12.041

 74. Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists. Hepatitis B, perinatal 

virus infection 2017 case definition. Atlanta, GA: Council of State 

and Territorial Epidemiologists; 2017. https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nndss/

conditions/hepatitis-b-perinatal-virus-infection/case-definition/2017/

 75. Nelson PK, Mathers BM, Cowie B, et al. Global epidemiology of 

hepatitis B and hepatitis C in people who inject drugs: results of 

systematic reviews. Lancet 2011;378:571–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/

S0140-6736(11)61097-0

 76. CDC. Viral hepatitis—CDC recommendations for specific 

populations and settings. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health 

and Human Services, CDC; 2015. https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/

populations/stds.htm

 77. Hurie MB, Mast EE, Davis JP. Horizontal transmission of hepatitis B virus 

infection to United States-born children of Hmong refugees. Pediatrics 

1992;89:269–73.

 78. Chaudhary RK, Perry E, Cleary TE. Prevalence of hepatitis B infection 

among residents of an institution for the mentally retarded. Am J Epidemiol 

1977;105:123–6. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112363

 79. Thompson ND, Perz JF, Moorman AC, Holmberg SD. Nonhospital 

health care-associated hepatitis B and C virus transmission: United 

States, 1998-2008. Ann Intern Med 2009;150:33–9. https://doi.

org/10.7326/0003-4819-150-1-200901060-00007

 80. Williams RE, Sena AC, Moorman AC, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination 

of susceptible elderly residents of long term care facilities during 

a hepatitis B outbreak. Vaccine 2012;30:3147–50. https://doi.

org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.02.078

 81. Woodruff BA, Vazquez E. Prevalence of hepatitis virus 

infections in an institution for persons with developmental 

disabilities. Am J Ment Retard 2002;107:278–92. https://doi.

org/10.1352/0895-8017(2002)107&lt;0278:POHVII&gt;2.0.CO;2

 82. Rosenberg SD, Goodman LA, Osher FC, et al. Prevalence of HIV, 

hepatitis B, and hepatitis C in people with severe mental illness. Am J 

Public Health 2001;91:31–7.

 83. Weinbaum CM, Williams I, Mast EE, et al. Recommendations for 

identification and public health management of persons with chronic 

hepatitis B virus infection. MMWR Recomm Rep 2008;57(No. RR-8):1–20.

 84. Weinbaum C, Lyerla R, Margolis HS. Prevention and control of 

infections with hepatitis viruses in correctional settings. MMWR 

Recomm Rep 2003;52(No. RR-1):1–36.

 85. Dienstag JL, Ryan DM. Occupational exposure to hepatitis B virus 

in hospital personnel: infection or immunization? Am J Epidemiol 

1982;115:26–39. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a113277

 86. Hadler SC, Doto IL, Maynard JE, et al. Occupational risk of 

hepatitis B infection in hospital workers. Infect Control 1985;6:24–31. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0195941700062457

 87. US Department of Labor. Occupational Safety and Health 

Administration. OSHA Law and Regulations. https://www.osha.gov/

law-regs.html

 88. CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of infections 

among chronic hemodialysis patients. MMWR Recomm Rep 

2001;50(No. RR-5):1–43.

 89. Alter MJ, Favero MS, Maynard JE. Impact of infection control 

strategies on the incidence of dialysis-associated hepatitis in the United 

States. J Infect Dis 1986;153:1149–51. https://doi.org/10.1093/

infdis/153.6.1149


Recommendations and Reports

28 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

 90. Finelli L, Miller JT, Tokars JI, Alter MJ, Arduino MJ. National surveillance 

of dialysis-associated diseases in the United States, 2002. Semin Dial 

2005;18:52–61. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1525-139X.2005.18108.x

 91. Zibbell JE, Iqbal K, Patel RC, et al. Increases in hepatitis C virus 

infection related to injection drug use among persons aged ≤30 years—

Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia, 2006–2012. 

MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:453–8.

 92. Bell BP. Hepatitis A and hepatitis B vaccination of patients with chronic 

liver disease. Acta Gastroenterol Belg 2000;63:359–63.

 93. Johnson DF, Leder K, Torresi J. Hepatitis B and C infection in 

international travelers. J Travel Med 2013;20:194–202. https://doi.

org/10.1111/jtm.12026

 94. Kellerman SE, Hanson DL, McNaghten AD, Fleming PL. Prevalence 

of chronic hepatitis B and incidence of acute hepatitis B infection in 

human immunodeficiency virus-infected subjects. J Infect Dis 

2003;188:571–7. https://doi.org/10.1086/377135

 95. Chun HM, Fieberg AM, Hullsiek KH, et al.; Infectious Disease Clinical 

Research Program HIV Working Group. Epidemiology of Hepatitis B 

virus infection in a US cohort of HIV-infected individuals during the 

past 20 years. Clin Infect Dis 2010;50:426–36. https://doi.

org/10.1086/649885

 96. Homann C, Krogsgaard K, Pedersen C, Andersson P, Nielsen JO. High 

incidence of hepatitis B infection and evolution of chronic hepatitis B 

infection in patients with advanced HIV infection. J Acquir Immune 

Defic Syndr 1991;4:416–20.

 97. Thio CL. Hepatitis B in the human immunodeficiency virus-infected 

patient: epidemiology, natural history, and treatment. Semin Liver Dis 

2003;23:125–36. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2003-39951

 98. Alter MJ. Epidemiology of viral hepatitis and HIV co-infection. J 

Hepatol 2006;44(Suppl):S6–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

jhep.2005.11.004

 99. Thio CL, Seaberg EC, Skolasky R Jr, et al.; Multicenter AIDS Cohort 

Study. HIV-1, hepatitis B virus, and risk of liver-related mortality in 

the Multicenter Cohort Study (MACS). Lancet 2002;360:1921–6. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(02)11913-1

100. Reilly ML, Schillie SF, Smith E, et al. Increased risk of acute hepatitis B 

among adults with diagnosed diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes Sci Technol 

2012;6:858–66. https://doi.org/10.1177/193229681200600417

101. Schillie SF, Xing J, Murphy TV, Hu DJ. Prevalence of hepatitis B 

virus infection among persons with diagnosed diabetes mellitus in the 

United States, 1999–2010. J Viral Hepat 2012;19:674–6. https://doi.

org/10.1111/j.1365-2893.2012.01616.x

102. Polish LB, Shapiro CN, Bauer F, et al. Nosocomial transmission of 

hepatitis B virus associated with the use of a spring-loaded finger-stick 

device. N Engl J Med 1992;326:721–5. https://doi.org/10.1056/

NEJM199203123261101

103. Emini EA, Ellis RW, Miller WJ, McAleer WJ, Scolnick EM, 

Gerety RJ. Production and immunological analysis of recombinant 

hepatitis B vaccine. J Infect 1986;13(Suppl A):3–9. https://doi.

org/10.1016/S0163-4453(86)92563-6

104. Stephenne J. Development and production aspects of a recombinant 

yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccine. Vaccine 1990;8(Suppl):S69–73, 

discussion S79–80.

105. CDC. Update: expanded availability of thimerosal preservative-free 

hepatitis B vaccine. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2000;49:642–51.

106. US Food and Drug Administration. Licensed biological products with 

supporting documents. Silver Spring, MD: US Department of Health 

and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration; 2017. https://

www.fda.gov/biologicsbloodvaccines/ucm133705.htm

107. Jack AD, Hall AJ, Maine N, Mendy M, Whittle HC. What level of 

hepatitis B antibody is protective? J Infect Dis 1999;179:489–92. 

https://doi.org/10.1086/314578

108. Bruce MG, Bruden D, Hurlburt D, et al. Antibody levels and protection 

after hepatitis B vaccine: results of a 30-year follow-up study and 

response to a booster dose. J Infect Dis 2016;214:16–22. https://doi.

org/10.1093/infdis/jiv748

109. Leuridan E, Van Damme P. Hepatitis B and the need for a booster dose. 

Clin Infect Dis 2011;53:68–75 https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cir270.

110. Simons BC, Spradling PR, Bruden DJ, et al. A longitudinal hepatitis B vaccine 

cohort demonstrates long-lasting hepatitis B virus (HBV) cellular immunity 

despite loss of antibody against HBV surface antigen. J Infect Dis 

2016;214:273–80. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiw142

111. André FE. Summary of safety and efficacy data on a yeast-derived 

hepatitis B vaccine. Am J Med 1989;87(3a):S14–20. https://doi.

org/10.1016/0002-9343(89)90525-1

112. Schillie SF, Spradling PR, Murphy TV. Immune response of hepatitis B vaccine 

among persons with diabetes: a systematic review of the literature. Diabetes 

Care 2012;35:2690–7. https://doi.org/10.2337/dc12-0312

113. Averhoff F, Mahoney F, Coleman P, Schatz G, Hurwitz E, Margolis 

H. Immunogenicity of hepatitis B Vaccines. Implications for persons 

at occupational risk of hepatitis B virus infection. Am J Prev Med 

1998;15:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0749-3797(98)00003-8

114. Shaw FE Jr, Guess HA, Roets JM, et al. Effect of anatomic 

injection site, age and smoking on the immune response to 

hepatitis B vaccination. Vaccine 1989;7:425–30. https://doi.

org/10.1016/0264-410X(89)90157-6

115. Bowman S, Grau LE, Singer M, Scott G, Heimer R. Factors associated 

with hepatitis B vaccine series completion in a randomized trial for 

injection drug users reached through syringe exchange programs 

in three US cities. BMC Public Health 2014;14:820. https://doi.

org/10.1186/1471-2458-14-820

116. Drachman R, Isacsohn M, Rudensky B, Drukker A. Vaccination 

against hepatitis B in children and adolescent patients on dialysis. 

Nephrol Dial Transplant 1989;4:372–4. https://doi.org/10.1093/

oxfordjournals.ndt.a091892

117. Lee C, Gong Y, Brok J, Boxall EH, Gluud C. Effect of 

hepatitis B immunisation in newborn infants of mothers positive for 

hepatitis B surface antigen: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 

2006;332:328–36. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.38719.435833.7C

118. Patel DM, Butler J, Feldman S, Graves GR, Rhodes PG. Immunogenicity 

of hepatitis B vaccine in healthy very low birth weight infants. J Pediatr 

1997;131:641–3. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-3476(97)70078-7

119. Marsano LS, West DJ, Chan I, et al. A two-dose hepatitis B 

vaccine regimen: proof of priming and memory responses in 

young adults. Vaccine 1998;16:624–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/

S0264-410X(97)00233-8

120. Cassidy WM, Watson B, Ioli VA, Williams K, Bird S, West DJ. 

A randomized trial of alternative two- and three-dose hepatitis B 

vaccination regimens in adolescents: antibody responses, safety, and 

immunologic memory. Pediatrics 2001;107:626–31. https://doi.

org/10.1542/peds.107.4.626


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

29

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

121. Fabrizi F, Dixit V, Messa P, Martin P. Hepatitis B virus vaccine in 

chronic kidney disease: improved immunogenicity by adjuvants? A 

meta-analysis of randomized trials. Vaccine 2012;30:2295–300. https://

doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.01.064

122. Hovi L, Valle M, Siimes MA, Jalanko H, Saarinen UM. Impaired 

response to hepatitis B vaccine in children receiving anticancer 

chemotherapy. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1995;14:931–4. https://doi.

org/10.1097/00006454-199511000-00002

123. Zuin G, Principi N, Tornaghi R, et al. Impaired response to 

hepatitis B vaccine in HIV infected children. Vaccine 1992;10:857–60. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0264-410X(92)90050-T

124. World Health Organization. Information sheet observed rate of vaccine 

reactions: hepatitis B vaccine. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 

Organization; 2012. http://www.who.int/vaccine_safety/initiative/

tools/Hep_B_Vaccine_rates_information_sheet.pdf

125. Bohlke K, Davis RL, Marcy SM, et al.; Vaccine Safety Datalink Team. 

Risk of anaphylaxis after vaccination of children and adolescents. 

Pediatrics 2003;112:815–20. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.112.4.815

126. Stratton K, Ford A, Rusch E, Clayton EW, eds. Adverse effects of vaccines: 

evidence and causality. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2012.

127. Stratton K, Almario D, McCormick MC, editors. Immunization safety 

review: hepatitis B vaccine and demyelinating neurological disorders. 

Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2002.

128. Halsey NA, Duclos P, Van Damme P, Margolis H; Viral Hepatitis 

Prevention Board. Hepatitis B vaccine and central nervous system 

demyelinating diseases. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1999;18:23–4. https://

doi.org/10.1097/00006454-199901000-00007

129. DeStefano F, Weintraub ES, Chen RT. Hepatitis B vaccine and risk 

of multiple sclerosis. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2007;16:705–7, 

author reply 707–8. https://doi.org/10.1002/pds.1408

130. Ray P, Black S, Shinefield H, et al.; Vaccine Safety Datalink Team. Risk 

of rheumatoid arthritis following vaccination with tetanus, influenza 

and hepatitis B vaccines among persons 15–59 years of age. Vaccine 

2011;29:6592–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.06.112

131. Rowhani-Rahbar A, Klein NP, Lewis N, et al. Immunization and 

Bell’s palsy in children: a case-centered analysis. Am J Epidemiol 

2012;175:878–85. https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kws011

132. Yu O, Bohlke K, Hanson CA, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine and risk 

of autoimmune thyroid disease: a Vaccine Safety Datalink study. 

Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2007;16:736–45. https://doi.

org/10.1002/pds.1354

133. Naleway AL, Belongia EA, Donahue JG, Kieke BA, Glanz JM; Vaccine 

Safety Datalink. Risk of immune hemolytic anemia in children 

following immunization. Vaccine 2009;27:7394–7. https://doi.

org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.09.023

134. McNeil MM, Weintraub ES, Duffy J, et al. Risk of anaphylaxis 

after vaccination in children and adults. J Allergy Clin Immunol 

2016;137:868–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2015.07.048

135. Baxter R, Lewis E, Fireman B, DeStefano F, Gee J, Klein NP. Case-

centered analysis of optic neuritis after vaccines. Clin Infect Dis 

2016;63:79–81. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciw224

136. Baxter R, Bakshi N, Fireman B, et al. Lack of association of Guillain-

Barré syndrome with vaccinations. Clin Infect Dis 2013;57:197–204. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cit222

137. Baxter R, Lewis N, Bohrer P, Harrington T, Aukes L, Klein NP. Sudden-

onset sensorineural hearing loss after immunization: a case-centered 

analysis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2016;155:81–6. https://doi.

org/10.1177/0194599816639043

138. Haber P, Moro PL, Ng C, et al. Safety of currently licensed hepatitis 

B surface antigen vaccines in the United States, Vaccine adverse event 

reporting system (VAERS), 2005–2015. Vaccine 2017. http://www.

sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264410X1731722X

139. Hadler SC, de Monzon MA, Lugo DR, Perez M. Effect of timing of 

hepatitis B vaccine doses on response to vaccine in Yucpa Indians. Vaccine 

1989;7:106–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/0264-410X(89)90046-7

140. Halsey NA, Moulton LH, O’Donovan JC, et al. Hepatitis B vaccine 

administered to children and adolescents at yearly intervals. Pediatrics 

1999;103:1243–7. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.103.6.1243

141. Wiström J, Ahlm C, Lundberg S, Settergren B, Tärnvik A. Booster 

vaccination with recombinant hepatitis B vaccine four years after 

priming with one single dose. Vaccine 1999;17:2162–5. https://doi.

org/10.1016/S0264-410X(99)00012-2

142. Jilg W, Schmidt M, Deinhardt F. Vaccination against hepatitis B: 

comparison of three different vaccination schedules. J Infect Dis 

1989;160:766–9. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/160.5.766

143. Tan KL, Goh KT, Oon CJ, Chan SH. Immunogenicity of recombinant 

yeast-derived hepatitis B vaccine in nonresponders to perinatal 

immunization. JAMA 1994;271:859–61. https://doi.org/10.1001/

jama.1994.03510350069039

 144. Brown RS Jr, McMahon BJ, Lok AS, et al. Antiviral therapy in chronic 

hepatitis B viral infection during pregnancy: A systematic review and meta-

analysis. Hepatology 2016;63:319–33. https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.28302

145. Jourdain G, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Cressey TR, et al. Prevention of 

mother-to-child transmission of hepatitis B virus: a phase III, placebo-

controlled, double-blind, randomized clinical trial to assess the efficacy 

and safety of a short course of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in women 

with hepatitis B virus e-antigen. BMC Infect Dis 2016;16:393. https://

doi.org/10.1186/s12879-016-1734-5

146. Han GR, Jiang HX, Yue X, et al. Efficacy and safety of telbivudine 

treatment: an open-label, prospective study in pregnant women for 

the prevention of perinatal transmission of hepatitis B virus infection. 

J Viral Hepat 2015;22:754–62. https://doi.org/10.1111/jvh.12379

147. Fan L, Owusu-Edusei K Jr, Schillie SF, Murphy TV. Cost-effectiveness 

of active-passive prophylaxis and antiviral prophylaxis during 

pregnancy to prevent perinatal hepatitis B virus infection. Hepatology 

2016;63:1471–80. https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.28310

148. Barbosa C, Smith EA, Hoerger TJ, et al. Cost-effectiveness analysis 

of the national Perinatal Hepatitis B Prevention Program. Pediatrics 

2014;133:243–53. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2013-0718

149. Hoerger TJ, Schillie S, Wittenborn JS, et al. Cost-effectiveness of 

hepatitis B vaccination in adults with diagnosed diabetes. Diabetes Care 

2013;36:63–9 10.2337/dc12-0759. https://doi.org/10.2337/dc12-0759

150. Hoerger TJ, Bradley C, Schillie SF, Reilly M, Murphy TV. Cost-

effectiveness of ensuring hepatitis B protection for previously vaccinated 

healthcare personnel. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2014;35:845–54. 

https://doi.org/10.1086/676865

151. CDC. General recommendations on immunization—recommendations 

of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 

MMWR Recomm Rep 2011;60(No. RR-2):1–64.


Recommendations and Reports

30 

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices

Membership as of September 16, 2016

Chair: Nancy Bennett, MD, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York.

Executive Secretary: Amanda Cohn, MD, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.

Members: Robert Atmar, MD, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Edward Belongia, MD, Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation, Marshfield, 

Wisconsin; Echezona Ezeanolue, MD, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Nevada; Paul Hunter, MD, City of Milwaukee Health Department, Milwaukee, 

Wisconsin; Allison Kempe, MD, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, Colorado; Grace Lee, MD, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, 

Massachusetts; Kelly Moore, MD, Tennessee Department of Health, Nashville, Tennessee; Cynthia Pellegrini, March of Dimes, District of Columbia; 

Arthur Reingold, MD, University of California, Berkeley School of Public Health, Berkeley, California; Laura Riley, MD, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 

Massachusetts; José Romero, MD, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas; David Stephens, MD, Emory University, Atlanta, 

Georgia; Peter Szilagyi, MD, University of California, Los Angeles, California; Emmanuel (Chip) Walter, Jr., MD, Duke University School of Medicine, 

Durham, North Carolina.

Ex Officio Members: Bruce Gellin, MD, National Vaccine Program Office, District of Columba; Richard Gorman, MD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 

Maryland; Amy Groom, MPH, Indian Health Service, Albuquerque, New Mexico; Mary Beth Hance, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Baltimore, 

Maryland; Jane Kim, MD, Department of Veterans Affairs, Durham, North Carolina; Narayan Nair, MD, Health Resources and Services Administration, 

Rockville, Maryland; Eric Sergienko, MD, Department of Defense, Atlanta, Georgia; Wellington Sun, MD, Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland.

Liaison Representatives: American Academy of Family Physicians, Margot Savoy, MD, Wilmington, Delaware; American Academy of Pediatrics, Carrie 

Byington, MD, Salt Lake City, Utah; American Academy of Pediatrics, Red Book Editor, David Kimberlin, MD, Birmingham, Alabama; American Academy of 

Physician Assistants, Marie-Michèle Léger, MPH, Alexandria, Virginia; American College Health Association, Susan Even, MD, Columbia, Missouri; American 

College of Nurse Midwives, Carol Hayes, MN, MPH, Atlanta, Georgia; American College of Nurse Midwives Alternate, Pamela Meharry, PhD, Chicago, 

Illinois; American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Kevin Ault, MD, Kansas City, Kansas; American College of Physicians, Sandra Fryhoffer, MD, 

Atlanta, Georgia; American College of Physicians Alternate, Gregory Poland, MD, Rochester, Minnesota; American Geriatrics Society, Kenneth Schmader, 

MD, Durham, North Carolina; America’s Health Insurance Plans, Mark Netoskie, MD, Houston, Texas; American Medical Association, Sandra Fryhoffer, 

Atlanta, Georgia; American Nurses Association, Charles Rittle, DNP, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; American Osteopathic Association, Stanley Grogg, DO, Tulsa, 

Oklahoma; American Pharmacists Association, Stephan L. Foster, PharmD, Memphis, Tennessee; Association of Immunization Managers, Christine Finley, 

MPH, Burlington, Vermont; Association for Prevention and Teaching Research, Paul McKinney, MD, Louisville, Kentucky; Association of State and Territorial 

Health Officials, Terry Dwelle MD, Bismarck, North Dakota; Biotechnology Industry Organization, Phyllis Arthur, District of Columbia.; Council of State 

and Territorial Epidemiologists, Christine Hahn, MD, Boise, Idaho; Canadian National Advisory Committee on Immunization, Ian Gemmill, MD, Kingston, 

Ontario, Canada; Infectious Diseases Society of America, Kathleen Neuzil, MD, Seattle, Washington; Infectious Disease Society of America Alternate, Carol 

Baker, MD, Houston, Texas; National Association of County and City Health Officials, Matthew Zahn, MD, Santa Ana, California; National Association 

of County and City Health Officials, Jeffrey Duchin, MD, Seattle, Washington; National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners, Patricia Stinchfield, 

MPH, St. Paul, Minnesota; National Foundation for Infectious Diseases, William Schaffner, MD, Nashville, Tennessee; National Immunization Council 

and Child Health Program, Mexico; Ignacio Villasenor Ruiz, MD, Mexico; National Medical Association, Patricia Whitley-Williams, MD, New Brunswick, 

New Jersey; National Vaccine Advisory Committee, Kimberly Thompson, ScD, Orlando, Florida; Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society, Sean O’Leary, MD, 

Denver, Colorado; Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society Alternate, Mark Sawyer, MD, San Diego, California; Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers 

of America, David Johnson, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania; Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine, Amy Middleman, MD, Houston, Texas; Society for 

Healthcare Epidemiology of America, David J. Weber, MD, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.

The ACIP Hepatitis Work Group

Membership as of September 16, 2016

Chair: Arthur Reingold, MD, University of California, Berkeley School of Public Health, Berkeley, California

Members: Natali Aziz, MD, MD, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California; Sharon Balter, MD, New York City Department of Health 

and Mental Hygiene, New York, New York; Elizabeth Barnett, MD, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts; Kathleen Harriman, 

PhD, California Department of Public Health, Richmond, California; Susan Even, MD, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; Christine Finley, 

Vermont Department of Health, Burlington, Vermont; Robert Frenck, MD, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio; Kathleen 

Harriman, PhD, California Department of Public Health, Richmond, California; Susan M. Lett, MD, Massachusetts Department of Public Health, Jamaica 

Plain, Massachusetts; Marian Major, PhD, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland; Brian McMahon, MD, Alaska Native Tribal Health 

Consortium, Anchorage, Alaska; Amy Middleman, MD, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; David A. Nace, MD, 

University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Gregory Poland, MD, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; Pamela Rockwell, DO, University of Michigan, 

Ann Arbor, Michigan; José Romero, MD, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas; Brenna Simons-Petrusa, PhD, Alaska Native 

Tribal Health Consortium, Anchorage, Alaska; Ann Thomas, MD, Oregon Health Authority, Portland, Oregon; David J. Weber, MD, University of North 

Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, Matthew Zahn, MD, Children’s Hospital of Orange County, Orange, California; Jennifer Zipprich, PhD, California 

Department of Public Health, Richmond, California.

Contributors (CDC): Carolyn Bridges, MD, Maria Cano, MD, Melissa Collier, MD, Mona Doshani, MD, Mark Gershman, MD, Penina Haber, MPH, 

Aaron Harris, MD, Beth Hibbs, MPH, Scott Holmberg, MD, Ruth Jiles, PhD, David Kim, MD, Alaya Koneru, MPH, Noele Nelson, MD, PhD, Sarah 

Schillie, MD, Philip Spradling, MD, Claudia Vellozzi, MD, John Ward, MD, Tureka Watson, MS, Donna L. Weaver, MN, Matthew Wise, PhD.


Recommendations and Reports

MMWR / January 12, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 1 

31

US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

CDC Adoption of ACIP Recommendations

Recommendations for the routine use of vaccines in children, adolescents, and adults are developed by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 

(ACIP). ACIP is chartered as a federal advisory committee to provide expert external advice and guidance to the Director of CDC on use of vaccines and related 

agents for the control of vaccine-preventable diseases in the civilian population of the United States. Clinical recommendations for routine use of vaccines 

are harmonized to the greatest extent possible with recommendations made by others (e.g., the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Academy of 

Family Physicians, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and the American College of Physicians).

ACIP recommendations adopted by the CDC Director become agency guidelines on the date published in MMWR. The accompanying recommendations 

that summarize the ACIP findings and conclusions were drafted based on the recommendations and revised based on feedback from ACIP voting members. 

The CDC Director approved these recommendations prior to publication. Opinions of individual members of ACIP might differ to some extent from the 

recommendations in this report as these recommendations are the position of CDC based on the ACIP recommendations to the CDC Director. Additional 

information regarding ACIP is available at https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip.




ISSN: 1057-5987 (Print)

The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free of 

charge in electronic format. To receive an electronic copy each week, visit MMWR’s free subscription page at https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/mmwrsubscribe.html. 

Paper copy subscriptions are available through the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402; telephone 

202-512-1800.

Readers who have difficulty accessing this PDF file may access the HTML file at https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/rr/rr6701a1.htm?s_

cid=rr6701a1_w. Address all inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for publication, to Executive Editor, MMWR Series, 

Mailstop E-90, CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30329-4027 or to mmwrq@cdc.gov. 

All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated.

Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations 

or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses 

listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication.

