
Clinical Practice Guideline



External Beam Radiation Therapy for Primary

Liver Cancers: An ASTRO Clinical Practice

Guideline

Abstract

Purpose: This guideline provides evidence-based recommendations for the indications and technique-dose of external beam radiation

therapy (EBRT) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (IHC).

Methods: The American Society for Radiation Oncology convened a task force to address 5 key questions focused on the indications,

techniques, and outcomes of EBRT in HCC and IHC. This guideline is intended to cover the deﬁnitive, consolidative, salvage, preopera-

tive (including bridge to transplant), and adjuvant settings as well as palliative EBRT for symptomatic primary lesions. Recommenda-

tions were based on a systematic literature review and created using a predeﬁned consensus-building methodology and system for

grading evidence quality and recommendation strength.

Results: Strong recommendations are made for using EBRT as a potential ﬁrst-line treatment in patients with liver-conﬁned HCC who

are not candidates for curative therapy, as consolidative therapy after incomplete response to liver-directed therapies, and as a salvage

option for local recurrences. The guideline conditionally recommends EBRT for patients with liver-conﬁned multifocal or unresectable

HCC or those with macrovascular invasion, sequenced with systemic or catheter-based therapies. Palliative EBRT is conditionally rec-

ommended for symptomatic primary HCC and/or macrovascular tumor thrombi. EBRT is conditionally recommended as a bridge to

transplant or before surgery in carefully selected patients.

For patients with unresectable IHC, consolidative EBRT with or without chemotherapy should be considered, typically after systemic

therapy. Adjuvant EBRT is conditionally recommended for resected IHC with high-risk features. Selection of dose-fractionation regi-

men and technique should be based on disease extent, disease location, underlying liver function, and available technologies.

Conclusions: The task force has proposed recommendations to inform best clinical practices on the use of EBRT for HCC and IHC

with strong emphasis on multidisciplinary care. Future studies should focus on further deﬁning the role of EBRT in the context of liver-

directed and systemic therapies and reﬁning optimal regimens and techniques.

Preamble

As the leading organization in radiation oncology, the

American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) is

dedicated to improving quality of care and patient out-

comes. A cornerstone of this goal is the development and

dissemination of clinical practice guidelines based on sys-

tematic methods to evaluate and classify evidence, com-

bined with a focus on patient-centric care and shared

decision making. ASTRO develops and publishes guide-

lines without commercial support, and members volun-

teer their time.

Disclosure Policy—ASTRO has detailed policies and

procedures related to disclosure and management of

industry relationships to avoid actual, potential, or per-

ceived conﬂicts of interest. All task force members are

required to disclose industry relationships and personal

interests from 12 months before initiation of the writing

effort. Disclosures go through a review process with ﬁnal

approval by ASTRO’s Conﬂict of Interest Review Com-

mittee. For the purposes of full transparency, task force

members’

comprehensive

disclosure

information

is

included in this publication. Peer reviewer disclosures are

also reviewed and included (Supplementary Materials,

Appendix E1). The complete disclosure policy for formal

papers is online.

Selection of Task Force Members—ASTRO strives to

avoid bias by selecting a multidisciplinary group of

experts with variation in geographic region, gender, eth-

nicity, race, practice setting, and area of expertise. Repre-

sentatives from organizations and professional societies

with related interests and expertise are also invited to

serve on the task force.

Methodology—ASTRO’s task force uses evidence-

based methodologies to develop guideline recommenda-

tions in accordance with the National Academy of Medi-

cine standards.1,2 The evidence identiﬁed from key

questions (KQs) is assessed using the Population, Inter-

vention,

Comparator,

Outcome,

Timing,

Setting

(PICOTS) framework. A systematic review of the KQs is

completed, which includes creation of evidence tables that

summarize the evidence base task force members use to

formulate recommendations. Table 1 describes ASTRO’s

recommendation grading system. See Supplementary

Materials, Appendix E2 for a list of abbreviations used in

the guideline.

Consensus Development—Consensus is evaluated

using a modiﬁed Delphi approach. Task force members

conﬁdentially indicate their level of agreement on each

recommendation based on a 5-point Likert scale, from

“strongly agree” to “strongly disagree.” A prespeciﬁed

threshold

of

≥75%

(≥90%

for

expert

opinion

recommendations) of raters who select “strongly agree” or

“agree” indicates consensus is achieved. Recommendation

(s) that do not meet this threshold are removed or revised.

Recommendations edited in response to task force or

reviewer comments are resurveyed before submission of

the document for approval.

Annual Evaluation and Updates—Guidelines are

evaluated annually beginning 2 years after publication for

new, potentially practice-changing studies that could

result in a guideline update. In addition, ASTRO’s Guide-

line Subcommittee will commission a replacement or

reafﬁrmation within 5 years of publication.


Introduction

Background

Primary liver cancers, primarily composed of hepato-

cellular carcinoma (HCC) and intrahepatic cholangiocar-

cinoma (IHC), are one of the most commonly diagnosed

cancers and the fourth leading cause of cancer mortality

worldwide.3 In the United States, incidence rates have

more than tripled since 1980 and have increased by

approximately 2% per year in the last 2 decades, with an

estimated 41,810 new cases in 2020.4 Despite the availabil-

ity of screening for HCC and improvements in the pre-

vention and treatment of risk factors (hepatitis B and C

virus infection and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease), mor-

tality rates continue to rise. Interest in the treatment of

HCC and IHC, therefore, remains high.

The optimal management of primary liver cancers

relies heavily on a multidisciplinary approach owing to

complexities in the diagnosis and staging, the medical

comorbidities (particularly the underlying cirrhosis), and

the myriad treatment options.5-8 Input and collaboration

from the disciplines of diagnostic radiology, pathology,

hepatology, transplant surgery, surgical oncology, medical

oncology, radiation oncology, and interventional radiology

are critical to achieve individualized and evidence-driven

patient care. Multiple treatment approaches are used for

the deﬁnitive treatment of primary liver cancers. For

HCC, orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT), surgery, and

thermal ablation (radiofrequency ablation [RFA] and

microwave ablation) are standard treatment modalities for

curative intent.9-11 Catheter-based therapies (eg, transarte-

rial bland embolization [TAE], transarterial chemoemboli-

zation

[TACE],

and

transarterial

radioembolization

[TARE]) are considered acceptable treatment options for

locoregional tumor control.12-16 In patients with HCC

with metastatic disease and/or macrovascular invasion

(MVI), systemic therapy (targeted therapy and/or immu-

notherapy) is considered standard of care.17-19 For IHC, a

combination of surgery and chemotherapy (with or with-

out radiation) is a standard treatment paradigm.7

Historically, external beam radiation therapy (EBRT)

for primary liver cancers was cautiously used because of

the relative radiosensitivity of liver tissue and technologi-

cal limitations in tumor delineation and radiation deliv-

ery. Advances in imaging and radiation treatment

delivery, in addition to improved understanding of nor-

mal liver tolerance to radiation, have led to an increasing

amount of clinical data on the use of EBRT for primary

liver cancers over the last 2 decades.20 In light of these

complexities and rapid growth of EBRT data, ASTRO

commissioned a task force to review the published litera-

ture on the role and use of EBRT for HCC and IHC and

create evidence-based recommendations that address 5

clinical KQs. It must be emphasized that this guideline is

not a substitute for evaluation and discussion in the mul-

tidisciplinary setting.

Deﬁnitions

In

this

guideline,

EBRT

includes

photon-based

approaches (3-dimensional [3-D] conformal radiation ther-

apy and intensity modulated radiation therapy [IMRT])

and proton therapy. Standard fractionation is deﬁned as

EBRT with a fraction size of 180 to 200 cGy. The task force

adopted modiﬁed deﬁnitions for hypofractionation as out-

lined in the ASTRO guideline for prostate hypofractionated

radiation therapy,21 subdividing it into “moderate hypofrac-

tionation” and “ultrahypofractionation.” These deﬁnitions

are inﬂuenced by the fractionation approaches used in pro-

spective studies described in detail later, considering the

dose per fraction and number of fractions. Moderate hypo-

fractionation is deﬁned as EBRT with a fraction size of 300

cGy to 500 cGy and typically involves between 12 and 20

fractions. Ultrahypofractionation is deﬁned as EBRT with a

fraction size &gt;500 cGy and typically involves ≤10 fractions.

Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) or stereotactic

body ablative radiation (SABR) is included in this fraction-

ation category but is speciﬁed as ultrahypofractionation

delivered in ≤5 fractions.22,23

Methods

Task Force Composition

The task force consisted of a multidisciplinary team of

radiation, medical, and surgical oncologists; medical physi-

cists, a hepatologist, a transplant surgeon, and a radiation

oncology resident. An interventional radiologist contributed

to the discussion during the initial phases of development.

This guideline was developed in collaboration with the

American Society of Clinical Oncology, American Society

of Transplant Surgeons, and the Society of Surgical Oncol-

ogy, who provided representatives and peer reviewers.

Document Review and Approval

The guideline was reviewed by 13 ofﬁcial peer

reviewers (Supplementary Materials, Appendix E1) and

revised accordingly. The modiﬁed guideline was posted

on the ASTRO website for public comment in April 2021.

The ﬁnal guideline was approved by the ASTRO Board of

Directors and endorsed by the American Society of

Transplant Surgeons, Canadian Association of Radiation

Oncology, European Society for Radiotherapy and Oncol-

ogy, and Society of Surgical Oncology.


Evidence Review

A systematic search of human subject studies retrieved

from the Ovid Medline database was conducted. The

inclusion criteria required research to involve adults (age

≥18 years), with a diagnosis of HCC or nonmetastatic

IHC, published in English, from January 2000 through

February 2020. Given that different qualities of evidence

were available for each KQ, the search inclusion criteria

were further reﬁned. Retrospective studies were restricted

to ≥25 patients for KQ2 and ≥50 patients for all other

KQs. For KQs 1 to 3, prospective trials required ≥25 par-

ticipants, whereas there was no minimum patient number

required for KQs 4 and 5. For speciﬁc subquestions where

there were limited data available, expert opinion was

relied upon to support recommendations, as reﬂected in

the low-to-moderate quality of evidence cited in these

cases.

The literature review excluded studies when EBRT

was not part of the therapeutic approach. Both Medical

Subject Heading (MeSH) terms and key search terms

were used, and terms common to all searches included:

primary liver tumor, hepatocellular carcinoma, intrahe-

patic cholangiocarcinoma, liver neoplasms/radiotherapy,

radiation therapy, external beam radiation therapy,

intensity modulated radiation therapy, volumetric-modu-

lated arc therapy, local control, overall survival, disease-

free survival, and liver toxicity. Additional terms speciﬁc

to the KQs and hand searches supplemented the elec-

tronic searches.

An additional literature search was also conducted to

include

meta-analyses

and

systematic

reviews

that

involved non-EBRT liver-directed therapies (LDTs). The

inclusion criteria required research to involve adults (age

≥18 years), with a diagnosis of HCC or nonmetastatic

IHC, published in English, from February 2015 to Febru-

ary 2020.

The data used by the task force to formulate recom-

mendations are summarized in evidence tables available

in the Supplementary Materials. References selected and

published in this document are representative and not all-

inclusive. The outcomes of interest are listed in Table 2.

Additional ancillary references are included in the text

but were not used to support the recommendations. See

the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and

Meta-Analyses (PRISMA ﬁgure) diagram showing the

number of articles screened, excluded, and included for

evidence review, and Supplementary Materials (Appendix

E3) for the literature search strategy, which includes

the evidence search parameters and inclusion/exclusion

criteria.

Scope of the Guideline

This guideline addresses only the topics speciﬁed in the

KQs (Table 2). The scope focuses on the use of EBRT in

the management of HCC and IHC, including indications,

outcomes, and techniques. It is intended to cover multiple

settings for which EBRT may be used, including deﬁni-

tive, preoperative, salvage, consolidative, adjuvant, and as

a bridge to OLT. Palliative management as it relates to

EBRT for symptomatic primary liver cancers is also

addressed.

This guideline is not intended to address the role of

surgery, thermal ablation, and catheter-based therapies

(eg, TACE and TARE) when used without inclusion of

EBRT. In accordance with the scope of the guideline, the

initial search was restricted to studies with EBRT as part

of the therapeutic approach. As a result, clinical outcome

data available on non-EBRT LDTs were limited. To

address this limitation, an additional literature search

(restricted to meta-analyses and systematic reviews) on

the use of non-EBRT LDTs for the management of

primary liver cancers was performed. Studies from this

additional search were not included in the evidence tables

but were intended to provide reference data and back-

ground context on clinical outcomes of non-EBRT LDTs.

However, because of heterogeneity in patient population

selection, tumor extension and location characteristics, as

well

as

clinical

outcome

metrics

(eg,

radiographic

response rate versus local control [LC]), these non-EBRT

LDT meta-analyses and systematic reviews did not pro-

vide additional meaningful clinical data for comparison.

Outside the scope of this guideline are several related

topics, including but not limited to the beneﬁts of recently

developed treatment delivery technology, including mag-

netic resonance imaging-guided EBRT and carbon ion

EBRT, and the role of palliative EBRT for extrahepatic

metastatic disease sites. These topics are relevant to fur-

ther the understanding of the role of EBRT in primary

liver cancers and may be the subjects of investigation in

future guidelines.

Key Questions and Recommendations

KQ1: EBRT in the deﬁnitive/nontransplant and

palliative settings in HCC (Table 3)

See

evidence

tables

in

Supplementary

Materials,

Appendix E4 for the data supporting the recommenda-

tions for KQ1 and Figures 1 and 2 for visual representa-

tions of the HCC recommendations.

What is the role of EBRT in the deﬁnitive/

nontransplant and palliative settings in HCC?

Surgery, OLT, and thermal ablation, when appropriate,

are considered the mainstays of curative treatments for

patients with HCC without MVI.9-11 Catheter-based ther-

apies have well-established roles in the management of

HCC in the nonsurgical, nontransplant setting.7 EBRT is

increasingly being considered as an additional therapeutic

option.12,13,15,16

Potentially resectable liver-conﬁned HCC without

MVI

Multiple retrospective studies as well as phase I and II

trials demonstrate similar outcomes to those reported

with other LDTs when EBRT is used as a deﬁnitive treat-

ment option for carefully selected patients with liver-con-

ﬁned early-stage disease. The vast majority of studies

reported 2- to 5-year LC rates of ≥90%, which compare

favorably

with

those

reported

for

other

ablative

LDTs.24,26-28,30,36,37 It is important, however, to recognize

the context in which patients were selected to receive

EBRT. Most of these studies used SBRT in patients with

relatively small HCC (1-6 cm in size), with a limited num-

ber of lesions (generally 1-5), who were not candidates for

deﬁnitive surgery or ablative procedures and had rela-

tively well-compensated baseline liver function (Child-

Pugh [CP] class A5, A6, and B7). One meta-analysis

found no statistically signiﬁcant difference in LC or over-

all survival (OS) between ultrahypofractionated EBRT

and RFA.31 Another meta-analysis of 32 ultrahypofractio-

nated EBRT studies reported 3-year pooled OS and LC

rates of 48.3% and 83.9%, respectively.32 A body of litera-

ture also exists on the use of particle beam therapy, pri-

marily with proton therapy, for HCC. In patients with

HCC treated with proton therapy as deﬁnitive treatment,

prospective and retrospective data have reported 5-year

OS and LC rates of 48% to 69%57-59 and 81% to 94%,

respectively.58,59

At the time of the evidence review, there were no

published randomized controlled trials (RCT) compar-

ing EBRT to thermal ablation for patients with liver-

conﬁned HCC without MVI. However, a noninferiority

RCT from Korea published in 2021 randomized patients

with recurrent HCC (size &lt;3 cm, number ≤2) to either

RFA or proton therapy.60 The results of this trial could

not be evaluated because it was published after the

guideline’s evidence review period, but it will be incor-

porated into future guideline updates. No randomized

data currently exist that directly compare EBRT to cath-

eter-based therapies, other than an interim analysis of

proton therapy compared with TACE that showed a

trend toward improved 2-year LC (88% versus 45%)

and progression-free survival (PFS) (48% versus 31%)

favoring proton therapy.42 Whether a patient with HCC

is most appropriate for EBRT or catheter-based thera-

pies depends on a multitude of patient and clinical fac-

tors, which should be discussed in a multidisciplinary

setting.

In regard to safety of EBRT for patients with HCC,

the reported rates of liver toxicity have been highly

variable, generally ranging from 0 to 21% in patients

with well-compensated liver function.24-27,30,43-45,53,61,62

The variability in reporting of radiation-induced liver

disease (RILD) stems from the heterogeneity in liver

toxicity deﬁnitions, EBRT regimens used, baseline liver

function, and prior LDTs. In contemporary studies,

classic RILD (deﬁned as anicteric ascites, hepatomeg-

aly, and elevation of alkaline phosphatase out of pro-

portion to other transaminases) was rarely reported.

When studies reported nonclassic RILD (eg, CP class

score increases of ≥2), most reported rates of 5% to

15%.26,27,30,43,44,53,61 For patients with liver cancers

treated with ultrahypofractionated EBRT (nearly 50%

had HCC), prospective quality-of-life data demonstrate

that EBRT is well tolerated with temporary effects on

appetite and fatigue, but no signiﬁcant decline in over-

all quality of life.63

The collective published data, therefore, support the

use of EBRT as relatively safe and effective in patients

with liver-conﬁned, potentially resectable HCC without

MVI who are not candidates for curative strategies (eg,

OLT, surgery, or thermal ablation) due to medical comor-

bidities, poor liver reserve, tumor location or size, and for

whom LDT is preferred. Common reasons why thermal

ablation would be technically suboptimal include lack of

ultrasound echogenicity/visibility, relatively large tumor

size (&gt;3 cm), and tumor location in close proximity to

the diaphragm, gallbladder, or large vessel that may result

in a heat sink effect.60 In these patients, EBRT alone is

recommended as a potential alternative ﬁrst-line therapy

option, along with catheter-based therapies. A typical

example is a patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary

disease who cannot tolerate general anesthesia or moder-

ate sedation and has a solitary 4 cm HCC tumor abutting

a main portal vein branch.

Multifocal and/or unresectable liver-conﬁned HCC

without MVI

For patients with liver-conﬁned HCC but more exten-

sive (multifocal and/or unresectable) disease in the

absence of MVI, LDTs are often used in carefully selected

patients (eg, noninﬁltrative or nondiffuse disease) after

multidisciplinary

evaluation.15,37-41

Several

studies,

including RCTs, have evaluated the potential beneﬁts of

combination therapy involving EBRT (primarily with 3-D

conformal EBRT techniques) and TACE in patients with

unresectable HCC.37-41 Multiple meta-analyses demon-

strated an improvement in OS with TACE plus EBRT

compared with TACE alone39,41,64 as well as superior

complete response rates.39 In a retrospective study of

patients with unresectable HCC and a median tumor size

of 8.5 cm (5.1-21 cm) treated with SBRT alone or

sequenced with TACE, patients who received combina-

tion sequenced therapy had a statistically signiﬁcant 5-

year OS rate of 46.9% versus 32.9%.37 In this study, com-

bination sequential therapy of SBRT and TACE, biologi-

cally effective dose assuming an a/b = 10 (BED10)

&gt;10,000 cGy, and an equivalent dose in 200 cGy per frac-

tion of ≥7400 cGy were signiﬁcant prognostic factors for

survival

outcomes.

Therefore,

for

carefully

selected

patients with HCC and multifocal and/or unresectable

disease for whom locoregional therapies are being consid-

ered, combination therapy of EBRT sequenced with

TACE is conditionally recommended as a treatment

option. Given limited data on the role of EBRT alone ver-

sus EBRT in addition to TACE, deﬁnitive conclusions

cannot be made regarding the role of EBRT alone in this

patient population. However, in cases where combination

therapy or catheter-based therapies are not feasible, EBRT

alone is a reasonable treatment option for similar clinical

scenarios. Phase I/II data that included patients with

median tumor sizes of 7.2 cm and up to 23.1 cm lend sup-

port that acceptable local control (1-year 87%) may be

achieved with EBRT alone even for relatively large

tumors.65 Given the increasing use of TARE and SBRT,

prospective data evaluating safety and efﬁcacy of the com-

bination are needed. Furthermore, when this guideline

was created, signiﬁcant uncertainties regarding liver

dosimetry evaluation still existed when combining both

modalities.

Liver-conﬁned HCC after incomplete response to

thermal ablation or catheter-based therapies

Thermal ablation and catheter-based therapies are

effective at treating liver-conﬁned HCC, with reported

initial objective response rates (complete/partial) of up to

61%.15,16,66,67 Repeat thermal ablation or catheter-based

therapies may be considered in those with an incomplete

initial response. Consolidative EBRT may also be a treat-

ment option in this setting, particularly when additional

thermal ablation or catheter-based therapies may result in

suboptimal ablation or are not technically feasible, as pre-

viously indicated. In patients who received consolidative

SBRT post-TACE, median survival rates ranged from 22.7

to 42 months,37-39 with 2-year LC rates reported up to

89%.38,43 In a retrospective study of planned adjuvant ver-

sus salvage SBRT post-TACE, superior overall response

rates were seen with planned adjuvant SBRT (80% versus

40%).38 CP class, performance status, and receipt of trans-

plant were associated with improved survival on multivar-

iable analysis.38,43 Data from a completed RCT presented

in abstract form (NCT02323360) may better deﬁne the

role of ultrahypofractionated EBRT after incomplete TAE

or TACE.68

Locally recurrent liver-conﬁned HCC

In patients with a local recurrence of HCC after sur-

gery, thermal ablation, or catheter-based therapies, fur-

ther treatment with LDTs is recommended.25,44-46 The

role of EBRT in this setting has been examined in multiple

retrospective studies, reporting 2-year OS and LC rates of

up to 81.9% and 84.1%, respectively.25,45,46 Propensity

score matching of SBRT versus TACE in medium-sized

recurrent HCC demonstrated superior LC at 3 years (75%

versus 57.5%) and OS (58.3% versus 5.9%) in favor of

SBRT compared with the TACE group.45 However, it is

difﬁcult to generalize these data to all patients with recur-

rent HCC given the differences in the percentage of

patients with recurrent versus primary de novo disease

reported in these studies, ranging from 30% to 65%, as

well as wide variation in types of initial therapy (primarily

after

TACE),

which

were

often

not

explicitly

reported.25,45,46 A multicenter phase II study that only

included patients with recurrent HCC treated with salvage

3 fraction SBRT after receiving 1 to 5 TACE sessions

reported 3-year LC rate of 95% and OS of 76%.44 CP class

B and albumin-bilirubin score were predictive factors for

worsening liver function in this population.44

Ultrahypofractionated EBRT has also been studied ret-

rospectively in the setting of incomplete thermal ablation.

A study that performed propensity score matching of

patients treated with either salvage ultrahypofractionated

EBRT or additional RFA after incomplete RFA found that

salvage ultrahypofractionated EBRT had superior 2-year

PFS (56.9% versus 20.7%) and similar 2-year OS (83.7%

versus 88.9%) compared with additional RFA.35 The task

force recommends consideration of salvage EBRT as a

treatment option for local recurrences after any LDTs,

particularly when additional non-EBRT salvage options

are not feasible or are considered suboptimal. If prior

LDTs involved EBRT or TARE, caution is recommended

when considering reirradiation with salvage EBRT; the

beneﬁts must be carefully weighed against the risks of

liver and other organ at risk (OAR) toxicity.

Liver-conﬁned HCC with MVI

For patients with HCC with liver-conﬁned disease

and MVI, a well-known poor prognostic factor, sys-

temic therapies are considered standard of care.17-19

Multiple other treatments are also available as thera-

peutic options, including surgery in carefully selected

patients

(see

KQ2)

and

catheter-based

therapies.

Growing evidence supports the use of EBRT as a com-

ponent of LDTs.48-53 One retrospective study showed a

signiﬁcant improvement in portal vein recanalization

with hypofractionation compared with standard frac-

tionated EBRT (33.3% versus 15.1%), in addition to

improved

objective

response

rates

(62.2%

versus

33.9%), median survival (10.9 versus 4.7 months,) and

2-year OS (15% versus 8%).48 On multivariate analy-

ses, BED10 &gt;6500 cGy, alpha-fetoprotein &lt;200 ngmL,

single

tumors,

and

Eastern

Cooperative

Oncology

Group performance status all predicted improved OS,

which was conﬁrmed in a propensity score-matched

analysis. An RCT of treatment-naïve patients with HCC

and MVI who received sorafenib versus TACE and EBRT

demonstrated signiﬁcantly improved PFS in the combina-

tion arm (median PFS 11.7 versus 31 weeks and OS 43 ver-

sus

55

weeks).50

Retrospective

data

have

shown

radiographic response rates (at least 50% necrosis) of

66.2% in patients with liver-conﬁned HCC with MVI

treated with EBRT alone or, most commonly, in combina-

tion with other LDT.49 In a retrospective comparison study

of sorafenib with or without EBRT, a statistically signiﬁ-

cant OS beneﬁt was shown with the addition of EBRT.56

The value of adding EBRT to systemic therapy for HCC

with MVI cannot be deﬁnitely ascertained until evidence

from high-quality RCTs are obtained (eg, Radiation Ther-

apy Oncology Group 1112 [NCT01730937]). However,


sufﬁcient evidence exists that supports the conditional

recommendation to consider EBRT as a treatment

option in these patients, alone or sequenced with sys-

temic or catheter-based therapies.48-53 The concurrent

combination of systemic therapy (eg, sorafenib) with

EBRT should be used with caution because of limited

available data and concern for excessive gastrointestinal

and hepatic toxicities.69,70

Symptomatic locally advanced and/or metastatic

HCC

Prospective data support the use of palliative EBRT

to help alleviate pain in patients with HCC and symp-

tomatic liver lesions. A phase II trial of single fraction

(800

cGy)

palliative

liver

EBRT

in

symptomatic

patients

with

extensive

HCC

demonstrated

an

improvement at 1 month in pain symptoms according

to the brief pain inventory (48% improvement on

average).71

The

presence

of

large

vascular

tumor

thrombi may affect portal blood ﬂow and cause pro-

gression of liver dysfunction and ascites. As previously

mentioned, EBRT is capable of re-establishing portal

vein ﬂow by recanalization in 15.1% to 33.3% of

patients,

depending

on

the

EBRT

technique

employed.48 Data also exist for the use of EBRT in

patients with more extensive MVI. Prospective and

meta-analyses of hypofractionated EBRT to vascular

tumor thrombi involving the inferior vena cava and/or

right atrium have exhibited LC rates of &gt;90% at 1

year

and

radiologic

response

rates

of

nearly

60%.47,54,55 Based on these studies, palliative EBRT

directed to symptomatic primary HCC tumors and/or

macrovascular tumor thrombus is conditionally recom-

mended, alone or sequenced with systemic therapy or

catheter-based therapies in the setting of patients with

locally advanced and metastatic HCC.

KQ2: Neoadjuvant EBRT before surgery or OLT

for HCC (Table 4)

See

evidence

tables

in

Supplementary

Materials,

Appendix E4 for the data supporting the recommenda-

tions for KQ2 and Figures 1 and 2 for visual representa-

tions of the HCC recommendations.

What is the role of EBRT in the neoadjuvant setting

before surgical resection or OLT for HCC?

The rationale for the use of EBRT as an LDT for

patients being considered for OLT is to provide tumor

downstaging or stabilization of disease while waiting

for organ availability or completion of transplant eligi-

bility. The selection of EBRT as a potential bridge to

transplant has generally been made in the setting of

ineligibility for other LDTs (eg, tumor located in close

proximity to a large vessel, which would be unfavor-

able for thermal ablation), once the patient has been

evaluated by the multidisciplinary team. Various dose-

fractionation regimens and EBRT modalities in the

bridge to transplant setting have been used, primarily

with SBRT regimens.38,42,72-77 Multiple retrospective

series

have

reported

that

approximately

63%

of

patients successfully receive an OLT after SBRT, indi-

cating that SBRT may be safe and effective as a bridge

to transplant.75,76 Outcomes for patients who receive

an OLT after EBRT as part of their bridge to trans-

plant regimen are favorable, with 5-year OS ranging

from 61% to 72.7%, with no signiﬁcant difference

between bridging LDT techniques (eg, TACE, TARE,

or RFA).72-74,77

Pathologic complete responses after EBRT were highly

variable across studies, ranging from 8.6% to 63%.73-77

One potential explanation for this variability may be

related to the time to transplant from completion of

EBRT. As the time to transplant increased, the pathologic

complete response rates tended to increase: 8.6% to 14%

for median time to transplant of 4 to 6 months compared

with 45% to 63% for median time to transplant of 8 to 12

months.72-77 Although some studies compared bridging

EBRT to other bridging LDTs, no deﬁnitive conclusions

can be made in terms of superiority of any of the currently

used bridging LDT regimens.42,73,74 RILD rates of any

grade in these series using EBRT (mainly SBRT) were rel-

atively low, ranging from 0 to 8.7%.38,42,72-77 Based on

these low-quality data of small observational studies,

EBRT using moderate or ultrahypofractionation is condi-

tionally recommended as a potential bridge to transplant

option alongside other bridging therapies (eg, thermal

ablation and catheter-based therapies).

The management of patients with liver-conﬁned HCC

with

MVI

is

challenging,

with

multiple

treatment

options. Although not routinely performed in these

patients, surgical resection is recognized as a potential

treatment approach in carefully selected patients after

multidisciplinary discussion.7 The rationale for neoadju-

vant EBRT before surgical resection in patients with

HCC with portal vein tumor thrombus is to reduce

tumor burden, particularly of the tumor thrombus com-

ponent, for patients who are otherwise surgically resect-

able to undergo hepatectomy. This is typically performed

for patients with Cheng type II (involving the right/left

portal vein) and type III tumor thrombus (involving the

main portal vein).78,79,81 It is noteworthy that nearly all

the literature for this combination approach is from

Asian countries,51,78-80 and that this practice paradigm is

not routinely used in Western countries. The highest

quality evidence is from a Chinese RCT that assessed the

value of hypofractionated neoadjuvant EBRT to 1800

cGy in 5 fractions in patients with Cheng type II and III

portal vein tumor thrombus. It demonstrated a signiﬁ-

cant improvement in 2-year OS from 9.4% to 27.4% and

disease-free survival from 3.3% to 13.3% with neoadju-

vant EBRT before hepatectomy versus hepatectomy

alone.79 Neoadjuvant EBRT appeared to be well-toler-

ated, with reported radiation-induced liver toxicities

grade ≥3 ranging from 0 to 2.4%.51,78-80 Based on this

low-quality data, neoadjuvant EBRT is conditionally rec-

ommended as a treatment option for patients with HCC

presenting with portal vein tumor thrombus.

Reported dose-fractionation regimens and EBRT

modalities in the neoadjuvant setting before partial

hepatectomy were varied, but generally included mod-

erate hypofractionation to 1800 to 4500 cGy in 300

cGy fractions (BED10 2340-5850 cGy).51,78-80 Close

collaboration with surgery is critical to discuss issues

such as adequate functional future liver remnant and

anticipated ﬁbrosis after neoadjuvant EBRT. Although

many of these earlier studies relied on older technolo-

gies and low-dose radiation therapy (RT), there is an

ongoing need for high-quality data to evaluate the role

of

ultrahypofractionation

before

hepatectomy

in

patients with portal vein thrombus. It is also noted

that these studies had a high proportion of patients

with hepatitis B, who may have had minimal to no

baseline cirrhosis and did not include patients with CP

class B8 or greater cirrhosis. Therefore, caution should

be applied when extrapolating these recommendations

to those with moderate-to-severe underlying liver cir-

rhosis outside the clinical trial setting.

KQ3: EBRT technique, fractionation, and OAR

constraints for HCC (Table 5)

See

evidence

tables

in

Supplementary

Materials,

Appendix E4 for the data supporting the recommenda-

tions for KQ3 and Figures 1 and 2 for visual representa-

tions of the HCC recommendations.

In patients receiving EBRT for HCC, what are the

preferred techniques, fractionation regimens, and

recommended OAR dose constraints?

Across multiple prospective trials and large retrospec-

tive series examining the role of EBRT for HCC, various

dose and fractionation regimens, techniques, and modali-

ties have been used. However, there are no published

RCTs comparing them. The topic of optimal tumor dose

for patients with HCC is an important one, as higher

tumor doses must be balanced with the risk of hepatic

decompensation of the underlying cirrhotic liver, which is

often irreversible and potentially fatal, as demonstrated in

the phase I/II setting.65,86 The potential beneﬁt of dose

escalation for HCC has been extrapolated from published

prospective and retrospective studies, primarily from the

SBRT literature.24,30,32,34,36,46,57,58,82-86 Regarding the rec-

ommended radiation dose for the treatment of liver-con-

ﬁned HCC, data on the dose threshold for optimal LC

and OS are conﬂicting and complicated by inherent

biases. The optimal dose-response relationship is not

clearly deﬁned in the available literature. There are data

showing a potential clinical beneﬁt in terms of improved

LC when using dose escalation (minimum BED10 6500-

10,000

cGy),

provided

OAR

constraints

can

be

met.32,34,43,48,96,97 Some studies suggest a minimum

BED10 of 6500 to 7900 cGy,34,48,54,95,96 while dose escala-

tion beyond BED10 of 10,000 cGy has been questioned.98

Additionally, an association between LC and tumor size

has been demonstrated, with decreasing LC as a function

of increasing tumor size, suggesting a potential need for

more intense dose escalation for tumors &gt;3 to 5 cm in

size.43,97

The selection of EBRT dose and safety proﬁle are highly

dependent on the patient’s baseline liver function, typically

deﬁned by their CP class. Much of the data on liver decom-

pensation after EBRT for HCC are derived from the SBRT

literature, which mostly excluded patients with CP class B

(score 8) or C liver dysfunction.27,30,43,44,61,86,92,93 The deﬁ-

nition of liver toxicity has evolved from classic RILD, which

is rarely reported in contemporary studies, to a nonclassic

RILD deﬁnition of increase in CP class of ≥2 points in the

ﬁrst 3 to 6 months post-EBRT.92,93,99 Patients who have

baseline CP class A liver function can generally be treated

safely with EBRT, if the dose to the normal liver is not

exceeded (see Table 7 for suggested EBRT dose constraints).

The risk of nonclassic RILD in patients with CP class A liver

function when meeting liver tolerance constraints ranges

from 5% to 15%.26,27,30,43,44,53,61 CP class B patients (score

8) are more sensitive than CP class A patients to liver

decompensation. The highest quality prospective study that

illustrates the need to stratify CP class A and B patients was

published by Indiana University.86 This trial differentially

determined the delivered dose based on the patients’ base-

line CP class (4800 cGy in 3 fractions for CP class A, 4000

cGy in 5 fractions for CP class B). Among the CP class A

patients, 50% progressed to a higher CP class (42% to CP

class B and 8% to CP class C), whereas among the CP class

B patients, 33.3% progressed to CP class C, demonstrating

the need for stringent dose constraints to the residual nor-

mal liver. Doses as low as 250 cGy to the liver have been

shown to be relevant, particularly in patients with liver dys-

function.86 Progression of the CP class was also found to be

related to OS, mainly when OLT was not an available

option. These data suggest that the total dose and dose per

fraction should be selected differently for CP class A and B7

patients, particularly in light of different normal liver dose

constraints between these patients (Table 7).86,91-93 Because

data on patients with CP class B8 and worse liver function

are limited, EBRT for these patients should be used with

caution.

In addition to SBRT, there have also been hypofractio-

nated trials using 10 to 15 fractions.46,59,62,90,100 Much of

the prospective literature included proton therapy with an

individualized approach of different fractionation regi-

mens based on tumor location relative to gastrointestinal

(GI) structures. For tumors that were located closer to a

GI structure, the number of fractions increased and the

dose per fraction decreased. The highest quality data for

de novo proton therapy for deﬁnitive treatment of unre-

sectable HCC comes from Japan in which 266 patients

were treated with doses stratiﬁed by tumor proximity to

GI structures, which yielded a 5-year LC rate of 95%:

peripheral tumors &gt;2 cm from GI structures were treated

to 6600 cGy in 10 fractions, tumors &lt;2 cm from the porta

hepatis were treated to 7260 cGy in 22 fractions, and cen-

tral tumors located &lt;2 cm from GI structures were treated

to 7700 cGy in 35 fractions.58,59 North American data for

15 fraction moderate hypofractionation have also been

published using 6750 cGy in 15 fractions for peripheral

tumors and 5805 cGy in 15 fractions for central tumors,

which demonstrated a 2-year LC rate of 94%.46

Given the existing prospective data and a plethora of

retrospective studies, ultrahypofractionation or moder-

ately hypofractionated regimens are recommended as fea-

sible treatment regimens for patients with HCC, with the

choice of fractionation regimen dependent on tumor loca-

tion, underlying liver function, available technology, and

meeting of dose constraints. Table 6 includes various

dose-fractionation regimens with the supportive referen-

ces noted. Expert consensus highlights the 3 to 5 fraction

regimens for ultrahypofractionation and the 15 fraction

regimen for moderate hypofractionation as preferred regi-

mens based on prospective trials.24,46,62,86

For patients with HCC, a high degree of dose confor-

mality is desired to ensure optimal tumor dose delivery

while minimizing dose to the surrounding OARs, particu-

larly to the normal uninvolved liver. Various conformal

treatment techniques (eg, step-and-shoot IMRT and volu-

metric-modulated arc therapy) have been used for

patients with HCC treated with EBRT, primarily in the

setting

of

ultra-

or

moderately

hypofractionated

regimens.44,48,58,65,86,101 The use of proton therapy for

HCC is of particular interest as an EBRT modality, given

its potential for improved normal liver sparing at low-to-

moderate doses.102 A single institution retrospective study

of patients with HCC that compared outcomes between

photon and proton therapies showed a potential signal of

clinical beneﬁt for protons, with improved survival and

less CP class score increases of ≥2.62 However, given the

limitations of retrospective analyses and lack of random-

ized data, there are insufﬁcient data to recommend one

technique or modality over another. The potential bene-

ﬁt of protons over photons is currently the subject of an

ongoing

RCT,

NRG

GI-003

trial

(NCT03186898).

Although there is a paucity of data comparing different

treatment techniques and modalities, use of conformal

techniques (either IMRT or proton therapy) for the

treatment of patients with HCC in the setting of dose-

escalated ultra- or moderately hypofractionated regimens

is recommended based on consensus of the task force.

Until higher quality evidence is available, the choice of

treatment modality and technique should be based on

tumor location, underlying liver function, and available

technology.

When EBRT is used in combination with TACE to

treat patients with HCC with MVI, moderately hypo-

fractionated regimens are the most commonly used

fractionation approach.39,50,52,53,87 The highest quality

data using moderate hypofractionation are from the

previously discussed RCT that demonstrated OS supe-

riority of TACE plus hypofractionated EBRT (3000-

4500 cGy in 10-15 fractions) over sorafenib alone in

CP class A patients with MVI.50 It should be noted

that

there

are

multiple

studies

using

standard

fractionated EBRT with concurrent hepatic arterial

infusion or systemic chemotherapy in the Asian litera-

ture for HCC with favorable clinical outcomes.103-106

Given

the concerns for increased toxicity, concurrent combi-

nation of EBRT and targeted therapy should be used

in the context of a clinical trial.

Although modern conformal treatment techniques

have the advantage of a high degree of dose confor-

mity required for target dose escalation while minimiz-

ing dose to OARs, they are less robust when there is

variability in patient setup and respiratory motion.

Image guidance is essential for the safe and effective

delivery of highly conformal treatment dose to account

for

inter-

and

intrafractional

motion.

Respiratory

motion assessment and management techniques allow

appropriate design of internal tumor volume margin

and accurate beam delivery with respect to intrafrac-

tional organ motion. Although there are no studies

that speciﬁcally address the value of daily image guid-

ance or respiratory motion management, prospective

and retrospective trials of EBRT for HCC routinely

reported using daily image guidance (eg, orthogonal

kilovoltage, computed tomography [CT] on rails, cone

beam CT) and respiratory motion management (eg,

breath hold, gating, tracking, abdominal compression)

to reduce tumor motion when possible. The use of

ﬁducial markers or presence of residual ethiodol/lipio-

dol from prior intra-arterial administration for tumor

localization and image guidance was variable across

studies and was institution-dependent.36,43,44,90,91

In patients with primary liver cancers treated with

EBRT, greater volumes of uninvolved liver (liver minus

the gross tumor volume) exposed to increasing doses

of RT increase the risk of RILD, most notably in

patients with cirrhosis.107 Therefore, it is critical to

evaluate and minimize RT dose to uninvolved liver,

speciﬁcally at the low-dose range, to reduce the risk of

RILD.86,90 Other potential modifying factors that may

increase the risk of RILD include underlying liver

function, extent of tumor, and use of current and/or

prior

chemotherapy.107

Signiﬁcant

heterogeneity

in

liver dose constraints exist among published studies

without standardized consensus. Table 7 provides rec-

ommended liver constraints for commonly used frac-

tionation

regimens,

based

on

a

combination

of

available

data,

including

prospective

studies

that

focused on constraints, and consensus of the task

force. Key elements that were considered included

baseline liver function and type of fractionation regi-

men. Both mean liver dose and volume of liver

spared constraints are included. Toxicity was deﬁned

as

CP

score

increase

≥2

at

3

months

and

beyond.92,93,99,108 The moderate hypofractionation lit-

erature using &gt;10 fractions has not historically sepa-

rated patients out by these criteria, although most

patients in these studies were CP class A patients. It

is

emphasized

that

the

selection

of

fractionation

regimen and degree of dose escalation must be care-

fully balanced against the dose to the uninvolved liver

and risk of RILD. Careful consideration of baseline

liver function and tailoring the fractionation regimen

and liver dose constraints are critical to the safe

EBRT treatment of patients with HCC. Dose con-

straints for GI OARs are also included and were

based upon published prospective studies, QUANTEC

(Quantitative Analyses of Normal Tissue Effects in

the Clinic), and American Association of Physicists

in Medicine recommendations.22,46,109

KQ4: EBRT in the deﬁnitive and adjuvant

setting in IHC (Table 8)

See

evidence

tables

in

Supplementary

Materials,

Appendix E4 for the data supporting the recommendations

for KQ4 and Figures 3 and 4 for visual representations of

the IHC recommendations.

What is the role of EBRT in the deﬁnitive and

adjuvant setting in IHC?

In patients with IHC, surgical resection is the only

potentially curative treatment. Among patients with unre-

sectable disease, systemic therapy is the mainstay of treat-

ment.123 However, historical median OS and intrahepatic

PFS rates are &lt;1 year after chemotherapy alone.115,118,120

After induction chemotherapy, the rationale for consider-

ation of consolidative EBRT in unresectable IHC, there-

fore, is to improve LC and intrahepatic PFS and to

mitigate tumor-related liver failure.115,118,120 Liver failure

results from portal or hepatic venous vascular obstruction

and/or biliary obstruction from tumor progression.115,120

LC and OS rates among patients with unresectable IHC

treated with EBRT in retrospective and prospective studies

support its effectiveness for consolidative treatment and

for salvage after disease progression.46,113,114,120 Among

patients without distant metastatic disease or multifocal

progression after initial systemic therapy, multiple retro-

spective studies strongly support EBRT with or without

concurrent ﬂuoropyrimidine chemotherapy for consolida-

tion.46,113-115,119,120 Across the range of studies, among

patients treated with EBRT, 1-year OS ranged from 39%

to 70%.46,110,115,119 Multiple contemporary studies using

moderately hypofractionated EBRT regimens demonstrate

favorable LC after treatment.114,124 In one retrospective

cohort study of patients who received photon or proton

therapy to 3750 to 6750 cGy or cGy (relative biological

effectiveness [RBE]) in 15 fractions for unresectable or

locally recurrent IHC, 84% 2-year LC and 58% 2-year OS

were achieved.113 In a prospective cohort of patients who

received proton therapy with a target dose of 5805 to 6570

cGy (RBE) in 15 fractions for unresectable IHC, 94% 2-

year LC was achieved.46 The main limitations of these

studies are the absence of randomized data evaluating the

role of EBRT, the paucity of data to directly compare out-

comes of EBRT versus systemic or other therapies, and

the potential selection bias among treatment groups when

treatments are compared in observational study designs.

These limitations emphasize the importance of multidisci-

plinary discussion for optimal management of IHC and

balancing the goals and risks/beneﬁts of EBRT. For

patients with unresectable IHC that are not candidates for

upfront systemic therapy, deﬁnitive EBRT alone or with

concurrent chemotherapy should be considered when

EBRT can be safely delivered.

For patients with resectable IHC who undergo curative

resection, high-risk prognostic factors, including positive

surgical margin status and involvement of lymph nodes,

are associated with worse LC and OS.125,126 The rationale

for adjuvant treatment in this setting is to optimize

locoregional control and potentially OS. There are no pro-

spective studies evaluating adjuvant EBRT after curative

resection in patients with IHC. Limited low-to-moderate

quality retrospective data provide support that adjuvant

EBRT, primarily in combination with concurrent chemo-

therapy, improves locoregional control and relapse-free

survival with trends in OS improvement.121,122 In one ret-

rospective study, among patients with higher risk “nar-

row” (&lt;1.0 cm) margin status, adjuvant EBRT was

associated with improved 3-year intra- and extrahepatic

tumor control compared with surgery alone (64% versus

33% and 57% versus 35%, respectively).122 Another study

demonstrated that compared with surgery alone, adjuvant

EBRT combined with concurrent chemotherapy yielded

superior recurrence-free survival.121 In the presence of

high-risk clinical features, the use of postoperative EBRT

with concurrent chemotherapy is conditionally recom-

mended, after multidisciplinary discussion, to reduce local

recurrence

risk

related

to

postsurgery

residual

disease.121,122 An important component of multidisciplin-

ary discussion is timing and sequencing of the radiation

course relative to any planned adjuvant chemotherapy, as

well as the chemotherapy agent to be used in combination

with EBRT, if so recommended.120

KQ5: EBRT technique, fractionation, and OAR

constraints for IHC (Table 9)

See

evidence

tables

in

Supplementary

Materials,

Appendix E4 for the data supporting the recommenda-

tions for KQ5 and Figures 3 and 4 for visual representa-

tions of the IHC recommendations.

In patients receiving EBRT for IHC, what are the

preferred techniques, fractionation regimens, and

recommended OAR dose constraints?

Patients with unresectable IHC have been treated with

a range of dose-fractionation regimens when EBRT was

used as deﬁnitive local therapy,46,110,113-115,119 but there is

a lack of randomized comparisons between these regi-

mens. The studies with the highest quality data used ultra-

or moderately hypofractionated regimens.46,113,114 A pro-

spective phase II trial using moderately hypofractionated

proton therapy prescribed doses according to tumor loca-

tion in 15 fractions (5805 cGy [RBE] for central tumors

within 2 cm from the porta-hepatis and 6750 cGy [RBE]

for peripheral tumors) and yielded 2-year LC, PFS, and

OS of 94.1%, 25.7%, and 46.5%, respectively.46

Retrospective series have shown similarly high rates of

LC when using hypofractionated regimens.46,110,114,119

Dose escalation potentially improves LC, with one series

demonstrating superior LC and OS when prescribing a

BED10

of

&gt;8050

cGy.114,119

One

multi-institutional

retrospective series reported results using SBRT, in which

42% of patients were treated with 3- and 5-fraction

approaches.110 In this study, treatment doses within the

target volume were heterogeneous relating to the SBRT
treatment

planning

approach,

and

higher

maximum

BED10 values (&gt;91 Gy10) were associated with improved

LC and OS. High-grade toxicities were uncommon in all

of these series. Although the quality of evidence is con-

sidered low given the limited quantity of data and lack

of randomized data, well-designed prospective study

data were sufﬁcient to conditionally recommend dose

escalated ultra- or moderately hypofractionated EBRT

for patients with unresectable IHC.46,119 There are no

data that compared fractionation regimens, so the spe-

ciﬁc choice of hypofractionated EBRT regimen should

be based on the tumor location, the underlying liver

function, consideration of the ability to meet normal tis-

sue constraints, and the technology available to deliver

the treatment course, with a goal of safely delivering an

escalated prescription dose while meeting OAR con-

straints. Although concurrent systemic therapy has been

used with moderately hypofractionated regimens,114 use

of systemic therapy concurrently with ultrahypofractio-

nation is not appropriate.

Available data regarding the potential clinical beneﬁts

of

adjuvant

EBRT

included

standard

fractionated

regimens.121,122 This approach is further supported by the

Southwest Oncology Group S0809 trial, which was a

phase II study of postoperative chemotherapy followed by

EBRT (4500 cGy to regional lymphatics and 5250-5940

cGy to tumor bed in 25-33 fractions) with concurrent

chemotherapy in patients with resected extrahepatic chol-

angiocarcinoma.127 Although patients with IHC were

excluded from this trial, the clinical context and EBRT

nodal target volumes are similar to those of postoperative

treatment for IHC, with the exception of potentially need-

ing to treat the liver resection margin of the liver remnant

for R1 margins in patients with IHC. This regimen was

well tolerated and was associated with a low risk of local

recurrence. Therefore, standard fractionation is condi-

tionally recommended for patients with resected IHC

receiving postoperative EBRT.121,122 An adjuvant dose of

4500 to 6000 cGy is reasonable to consider depending on

the clinical scenario, surgical margin status, postoperative

imaging, and dose to OARs.

As with patients with HCC, normal tissue sparing is a

major concern for patients with unresectable IHC treated

with EBRT, which requires a high degree of dose con-

formity to ensure optimal tumor dose escalation

while minimizing dose to the surrounding OARs.

Various conformal treatment techniques (eg, static

ﬁeld IMRT, volumetric-modulated arc therapy, and

proton therapy) have been reported in clinical studies

of

patients

with

unresectable

IHC.46,110,113,114,119

However, there is insufﬁcient evidence to evaluate

and compare the outcome and toxicity proﬁles of

these different treatment techniques. Given the pau-

city of data directly evaluating different treatment

techniques, conformal techniques are conditionally

recommended for treatment of patients with unre-

sectable IHC. Until randomized data regarding the

beneﬁts of these techniques are available, choice of

appropriate conformal techniques should be based on

tumor

location,

underlying

liver

function,

and

resource and technology availability.

Similar to patients with HCC, image guidance and

motion management techniques are critical to the safe

and effective delivery of highly conformal EBRT for

patients with IHC. Daily image guidance based on in-

room imaging (eg, orthogonal kV, cone beam CT, CT on

rails) was used in most clinical studies of patients with

unresectable IHC.46,110,113,114,119 Various motion assess-

ment and management techniques were reported for

patients with unresectable IHC in clinical studies, includ-

ing patient-speciﬁc respiratory assessment (eg, 4-D CT,

abdominal compression, voluntary or forced breath-hold,

and respiratory gating). Many of these studies permitted

mixed motion management and were selected on an indi-

vidual patient basis.110,113,114,119 Respiratory motion con-

trol and daily image guidance are strongly recommended

for patients receiving ultra- or moderately hypofractio-

nated EBRT.

Although many patients with IHC may not have cir-

rhosis, the importance of minimizing RT dose to the

normal liver is still critical to minimize the risk of

RILD. In most published series of patients with IHC

treated with EBRT, the reported rates of RILD were

low.46,113-115,119 This is likely due to patient selection

(limiting to patients without cirrhosis or with well-com-

pensated CP class A or B cirrhosis) and prespeciﬁed

treatment planning goals for reducing radiation dose to

uninvolved liver.46,119 Some studies have incorporated

individualized prescription dosing based on dose to

uninvolved liver determined during the treatment plan-

ning process.46,113,119 The speciﬁc goals for dose to

uninvolved liver are dependent on the fractionation

schedule used and potentially the patient’s underlying

liver function (typically CP class). Table 7 includes

examples of dose-volume constraints for patients with

primary liver cancers, including IHC.



Figure 4

Algorithm for IHC: Liver conﬁned, resectable.

Abbreviations: chemo = chemotherapy; IHC = intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma; RT = radiation therapy.

* Enrollment in a clinical trial should be prioritized if available.

y Consider additional surgical resection when feasible before adjuvant therapy.

z Order of listed options does not reﬂect a particular preference; decision is based on multidisciplinary evaluation.

Conclusions/Future Directions

The treatment of patients with HCC and IHC is com-

plex and requires a multidisciplinary approach intended

to select not only the most appropriate upfront therapy

but to determine the risk and beneﬁts of appropriately

combining or sequencing potential available modalities.

Currently, high-quality evidence to guide the use of EBRT

in patients with liver-conﬁned HCC and IHC disease is

limited. However, low-to-moderate quality evidence from

observational and prospective studies published at the

time of the literature review support the consideration of

EBRT as a reasonable potential treatment option in vari-

ous clinical settings for HCC and IHC, including deﬁni-

tive, consolidative, salvage, and adjuvant therapy. In

certain clinical scenarios, EBRT may also be combined or

sequenced with other LDTs. Data from RCTs published

after the guideline’s literature review end date (eg, the

Korean phase III trial comparing proton therapy with

thermal

ablation),60

completed

RCTs

presented

in

abstract

form

(eg,

the

Italian

phase

III

study

[NCT02323360] that compared ultrahypofractionation to

additional TAE or TACE after incomplete TAE or

TACE),68 and ongoing RCTs (eg, ABC-07 [CRUK/14/

029], which is comparing systemic therapy with and with-

out EBRT in IHC) will provide further clariﬁcation on the

role of EBRT in HCC and IHC. Because the number and

quality of comparative studies between EBRT and other

LDTs are limited, deﬁnitive conclusions cannot be made

on the role and effectiveness of EBRT in comparison to

other LDTs.

The choice of dose-fractionation regimens, technique,

and modality should ultimately depend on tumor loca-

tion, underlying liver function, and available technologies

given the lack of published RCTs directly comparing the

preferred technical aspects of EBRT for HCC and IHC.

Whenever possible, moderate dose escalation in the form

of ultra- or moderate hypofractionation is recommended

when OAR constraints can be safely met. Careful consid-

eration of baseline liver function and tailoring the frac-

tionation regimen and liver dose constraints are critical to

the safety of EBRT in the treatment of patients with HCC

and IHC. It is imperative to minimize the risk of liver tox-

icity, particularly in patients with cirrhosis because it is

often irreversible and potentially life-threatening, unless

salvage OLT becomes an option.

In addition to conducting more high-quality clinical

trials, particularly RCTs comparing different LDTs, sev-

eral important topics and areas of research are needed to

fully understand the role of EBRT for HCC and IHC.

Some of the most relevant include (1) reﬁnement of opti-

mal tumor dose and normal liver dose constraints; (2)

consensus in reporting radiologic response and liver tox-

icity metrics; (3) serum and functional liver imaging bio-

markers for improved risk stratiﬁcation, identiﬁcation of

early response and toxicity, and individualized adaptive

treatment; (4) integration of EBRT with systemic thera-

pies, including molecular targeted therapy and immuno-

therapy; (5) clinical beneﬁt of magnetic resonance

imaging-guided EBRT; and (6) patient selection and indi-

cations for EBRT versus TARE and potential interactions

when used sequentially.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Yimin Geng, MSLIS, MS, the UT—

MD Anderson research medical librarian, for her assistance

with creating the search strategy for this guideline; to Olsi

Gjyshi, MD, Rebecca Levin-Epstein, MD, Todd Pezzi, MD,

Steven Seyedin, MD, and Sara Zakem, MD, for literature

review assistance; and to Lisa Bradﬁeld and Rachel

McCausland for guidance regarding guideline methodology

and project management. We also thank the Society of

Interventional Radiology for contributions during the

development process and for the multidisciplinary discus-

sion through their nominated representative. However,

they withdrew their participation as a collaborating society

on this guideline during the early phases of development.

The task force thanks the peer reviewers for their

comments and time spent reviewing the guideline. See

Appendix E1 for their names and disclosures.