
 

 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

■ 

Hepatitis B Management:  

Guidance for the Primary Care Provider 

Last updated February 25, 2020 

The purpose of this document is to provide simplified, 

up-to-date, and readily accessible guidance for primary care 

medical providers related to the prevention, diagnosis, and 

management of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, including 

hepatocellular carcinoma surveillance. 

About the HBV Primary Care Workgroup 

This guidance was developed by the Hepatitis B Primary Care 

Workgroup, a multidisciplinary panel of national experts in the field of 

viral hepatitis B, including representation from hepatology, infectious 

diseases, pharmacy, primary care, public health, and other national 

organizations. The workgroup was organized by the National Taskforce 

on Hepatitis B in partnership with the San Francisco Hep B Free — Bay 

Area and Project ECHO™ and did not receive any outside funding. 

Collaboration with University of Washington 

This guidance was produced in collaboration with the University of 

Washington’s National Hepatitis Training Center (HTC). The UW HTC will 

host and feature the most current version of these guidelines on the free 

Hepatitis B Online website (hepatitisB.uw.edu). The UW HTC is funded by 

the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 

Suggested citation. Tang AS, Thornton K, and HBV Primary Care Workgroup. 

Hepatitis B Management: Guidance for the Primary Care Provider. 

February 25, 2020. [https://www.hepatitisB.uw.edu/hbv-pcw/guidance] 

 

 

HBV Primary Care  

Workgroup 

HBV GUIDANCE CO-CHAIRS 

Amy S. Tang, MD 

Karla Thornton, MD, MPH 

HEPATOLOGY 

Eric W. Chak, MD, MPH 

Robert G. Gish, MD 

Anna S. Lok, MD 

Brian J. McMahon, MD 

Lewis R. Roberts, MB, ChB, PhD 

Norah A. Terrault, MD, MPH 

INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

Camilla S. Graham, MD, MPH 

David H. Spach, MD 

Mark S. Sulkowski, MD 

Karla Thornton, MD, MPH 

PHARMACY 

Paulina Deming, PharmD 

PRIMARY CARE 

Richard Andrews, MD, MPH 

Amy S. Tang, MD 

Grace Wang, MD, MPH 

Su Wang, MD, MPH 

PUBLIC HEALTH 

Moon S. Chen Jr., PhD, MPH 

Chari Cohen, DrPH, MPH 

Stuart Fong, MD 

Aaron M. Harris, MD, MPH 

Rita K. Kuwahara, MD, MIH 

Richard So, MPH, MPA 

Ann Winters, MD 

Additional Workgroup Support 

Melanie Bird, PhD 

Jennifer Lim 

Amir Qaseem, MD, PhD 

Amy Trang, PhD, M.Ed 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Chronic Hepatitis B Testing and Management Algorithm ........................... 2 

Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) Serology Interpretation and Management ........... 3 

Initial Evaluation of the HBsAg(+) Patient ................................................... 4 

Counseling of the HBsAg(+) Patient ............................................................ 4 

Management of the HBsAg(+) Patient ........................................................ 5 

Preferred Antiviral Treatment of the HBsAg(+) Patient .............................. 6 

Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) Surveillance ............................................ 7 

Perinatal HBV Management ........................................................................ 8 

Selected References .................................................................................... 9 

HBV Primary Care Workgroup Members .................................................. 10 

Disclosures ................................................................................................ 11 

 


2 

Last updated February 25, 2020 

 Chronic Hepatitis B Testing and Management Algorithm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 Do not include anti-HBc IgM in HBV screening panel unless suspect acute HBV. 

 

 

 

Screen for chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection with: 

  &gt;  Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), and 

  &gt;  Hepatitis B surface antibody (anti-HBs), and 

  &gt;  Hepatitis B core antibody (anti-HBc): Total or IgG1 

See HBV Evaluation, Counseling, 

Management, Treatment, and  

HCC Surveillance (pages 4, 5, 6, 7) 

See HBV Serology Interpretation 

and Management 

(page 3) 

If pregnant, see 

Perinatal HBV 

Management 

(page 8) 

If treatment 

candidate, see 

Preferred HBV 

Antiviral Treatment 

(page 6) 

HBsAg(–) 

HBsAg(+) 

If susceptible to HBV as 

indicated by anti-HBc(–) 

&amp; anti-HBs(–), vaccinate 

If prior HBV infection  

as indicated by  

anti-HBc(+), counsel on 

HBV reactivation risk 


3 

Last updated February 25, 2020 

 Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) Serology Interpretation and Management 

HBsAg 

Anti-HBc  

(Total or IgG)  

Anti-HBs 

Interpretation 

Management 

+ 

+ 

–/+ 

Current infection 

 

&gt; See Evaluation, Counseling, Management, 

Treatment, and HCC Surveillance (pages 4, 5, 

6, 7) 

&gt; Refer household and sexual contacts for HBV 

screening; if susceptible, vaccinate 

– 

+ 

+ 

Prior infection with 

immune control 

&gt; No transmission risk; HBV dormant in liver 

&gt; Reactivation risk if on immunosuppressive 

medications 

– 

+ 

– 

Prior infection or 

occult infection1 

&gt; If immunocompetent2, counsel as prior 

infection above 

&gt; Reactivation risk if on immunosuppressive 

medications 

&gt; If immunocompromised, check HBV DNA for 

occult infection1 

– 

– 

+ 

Immune from prior 

vaccination 

Protected for life. No need for booster vaccine 

– 

– 

– 

Susceptible 

VACCINATE3 

 

1 Occult HBV infection is defined by the presence of detectable HBV DNA in persons who are negative for HBsAg. Patients with occult 

HBV infection should be managed similarly to those with current infection, but note that most have very low HBV DNA levels and do 

not need HBV treatment.  

2 Consider HBV vaccination for persons with no known risk factors or persons not from an area of intermediate or high endemicity 

as this may represent a false-positive anti-HBc result. The rate of false positive anti-HBc is less than 2 per 1,000 tests using 

current assays. 

3 For “susceptible” persons considered at high risk for HBV who previously received a complete vaccine series without follow-up 

serologic testing, acceptable management options include (a) give a booster vaccine dose followed by serologic testing 1 to 2 months 

later, with completion of a full vaccine series if the post-booster anti-HBs test remains negative or (b) give full vaccine series followed 

by post-vaccination serologic testing 1 to 2 months after the last vaccine dose. 

 

Post-Vaccination Serologic Testing 

Assessment of the response to HBV vaccination with a post-vaccination serologic test of anti-HBs 

between 1 and 2 months after the final dose of vaccine should be obtained in all of the following 

adult groups at high risk for HBV:  

&gt; Health care personnel and public safety workers 

&gt; Sexual and household contacts of HBsAg(+) persons 

&gt; Hemodialysis patients 

&gt; Persons who inject drugs  

&gt; Persons with HIV and other immunocompromising conditions 

 


4 

Last updated February 25, 2020 

 Initial Evaluation of the HBsAg(+) Patient 

History/Examination 

Routine Laboratory Tests 

Serology/Virology 

Imaging/Staging Studies 

□ Symptoms/signs of 

cirrhosis 

□ Alcohol and metabolic 

risk factors 

□ Family history of 

hepatocellular 

carcinoma (HCC) 

□ Hepatitis A vaccination 

status 

 

□ CBC comprehensive 

□ Comprehensive 

metabolic panel 

including: 

 AST/ALT 

 Total bilirubin 

 Alkaline phosphatase 

 Albumin 

 Creatinine 

□ INR 

□ HBeAg/anti-HBe 

□ HBV DNA 

□ Anti-HAV (total or IgG) 

to determine need for 

vaccination if none 

documented 

□ Anti-HCV 

□ Anti-HDV 

□ Anti-HIV 

 

□ Abdominal ultrasound 

□ Elastography  

(e.g. FibroScan)  

or 

Serum fibrosis 

assessment1 (e.g. APRI, 

FibroSure, FIB-4) 

 

1 APRI and FIB-4 scores can be calculated using platelet count and AST and ALT from routine labs. Calculators with score interpretation 

are available. See Hepatitis B Online APRI calculator and FIB-4 calculator. FibroSure and FibroTest are commercially available blood 

tests that can be ordered as well. 

 Counseling of the HBsAg(+) Patient 

1.  Give a plan for follow-up care. Patients will need regular (minimum every 6 months) follow-up and 

monitoring for disease progression.  

2.  Educate and counsel on the long-term implications of chronic HBV infection (e.g., cirrhosis and 

hepatocellular carcinoma).  

3.  Advise patient to inform all current and future medical providers of their HBsAg-positive status, 

especially if they ever need treatment for cancer or any immunologic condition such as rheumatoid 

arthritis or other immune disorders. 

4.  Counsel to avoid or limit alcohol use.  

5.  Advise to optimize body weight and address metabolic complications, including control of diabetes 

and dyslipidemia (to prevent concurrent development of metabolic syndrome and fatty liver). 

6.  Provide education on how to prevent transmission of HBV to others.  

Persons with chronic HBV: 

Should: 

&gt; Verify that sexual contacts, household contacts, 

family members, or injection partners are screened 

and vaccinated 

&gt; Cover open cuts and scratches 

&gt; Clean blood spills with diluted bleach (1:10) 

&gt; Use condoms to prevent HBV transmission 

during sexual intercourse with partners 

who are susceptible to HBV infection. 

Should 

NOT: 

&gt; Share toothbrushes, razors, nail clippers, or earrings 

&gt; Share injection equipment 

&gt; Share glucose testing equipment 

&gt; Donate blood, organs, or sperm 

Can: 

&gt; Participate in all activities, including contact sports 

&gt; Share food and utensils, or kiss others 

&gt; Pursue educational or career opportunities 

without limitations, including work as a 

health care professional 

 


5 

Last updated February 25, 2020 

 Management of the HBsAg(+) Patient1 

Cirrhosis 

HBV DNA (IU/mL) 

ALT (U/L) 

Management 

YES 

Any 

Any 

&gt; TREAT with antiviral medication (page 6) 

&gt; Monitor HBV DNA and ALT every 6 months 

&gt; Refer to specialist for screening endoscopy and, if needed, for 

other cirrhosis-related complications 

&gt; HCC surveillance, including in persons who become HBsAg(-) 

(page 7) 

&gt; All patients with decompensated cirrhosis2 should be 

promptly referred to a hepatologist 

NO 

&gt;2,000 

Elevated3 

&gt; TREAT with antiviral medication (page 6) 

&gt; Monitor HBV DNA and ALT every 6 months 

&gt; Monitor HBeAg and anti-HBe every 6 months in patients  

who are HBeAg+ at time of treatment initiation to evaluate 

for seroconversion from HBeAg(+)/anti-HBe(-) to  

HBeAg(-)/anti-HBe(+) 

&gt; Check HBsAg annually if/when HBeAg negative 

Normal 

&gt; Monitor HBV DNA and ALT every 6 months 

&gt; Liver fibrosis assessment every 2 to 3 years 

≤2,000 

Elevated3 

&gt; Evaluate other etiologies for elevated ALT 

&gt; Monitor HBV DNA and ALT every 6 months 

Normal 

&gt; Monitor HBV DNA and ALT every 6 months and  

HBsAg every 1 year for seroclearance 

1 In contrast to other HBV guidelines that have incorporated HBeAg status into treatment initiation decisions for non-cirrhotic HBsAg(+) 

patients, this guidance for primary care providers uses only HBV DNA and ALT to determine initial treatment indication in non-

cirrhotic HBsAg(+) patients.  

2  Patients should be considered to have decompensated cirrhosis and promptly referred to a hepatologist if any of the following are 

present: jaundice, ascites, variceal hemorrhage, hepatic encephalopathy, or a Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) score ≥7 (see Hepatitis B 

Online CTP calculator. 

3 Elevated ALT defined as &gt;25 U/L in females and &gt;35 U/L in males that is persistent for at least 3 to 6 months. 

 

Assessing Treatment Response and Endpoints for Antiviral Discontinuation 

After initiation of HBV antiviral, recheck HBV DNA every 3 months until undetectable, then every 

6 months once undetectable. If the patient does not achieve undetectable HBV DNA after 1 year of 

antiviral therapy and the HBV DNA levels are not downtrending, obtain expert consultation or refer 

to a specialist.  

&gt; Persons with cirrhosis: Do not stop antiviral treatment, unless guided by expert consultation. 

&gt; Persons without cirrhosis and HBeAg(+) at baseline: Patients with persistent undetectable HBV 

DNA, normal ALT, and persistent HBeAg(-) and anti-HBe(+) 1 year after HBeAg seroconversion 

[from HBeAg(+)/anti-HBe(-) to HBeAg(-)/anti-HBe(+)] may trial off antiviral treatment. 

&gt; Persons without cirrhosis and HBeAg(-) at baseline: Continue antiviral treatment until HBsAg 

clearance. 


6 

Last updated February 25, 2020 

 Preferred Antiviral Treatment of the HBsAg(+) Patient 

Drug 

Adult dose 

Pregnancy category1 

Side effects 

Monitoring on treatment 

Entecavir 

Baraclude 

Standard: 0.5 mg 

by mouth daily 

Decompensated 

liver disease: 1 mg 

by mouth daily 

Take 2 hours 

before or after 

food 

Formerly FDA 

category C  

Limited pregnancy 

exposure, pregnancy 

exposure registry 

available 

Insufficient human 

data to assess risk of 

major birth defects 

No adverse effects 

observed in animal 

studies 

Headache, fatigue, 

dizziness, nausea 

reported in ≥3% 

Post-marketing 

surveillance include 

infrequent reports 

of: 

&gt; lactic acidosis  

&gt; severe 

hepatomegaly 

Adjust dose with CrCl 

&lt;50 mL/min 

Avoid in pregnant patients 

Avoid in patients with prior 

exposure to lamivudine or 

known lamivudine resistance 

Lactic acid levels if clinical 

concern 

Tenofovir 

disoproxil 

fumarate 

(TDF) 

Viread 

300 mg by mouth 

daily 

Take without 

regard to food 

Formerly FDA 

category B  

Pregnancy exposure 

registry available 

Extensive data from 

pregnant women with 

HIV or HBV infections 

indicate no increase in 

pregnancy 

complications or major 

birth defects 

Nausea (9%) 

Post-marketing 

surveillance include 

infrequent reports 

of: 

&gt; nephropathy  

&gt; Fanconi syndrome 

&gt; osteomalacia  

&gt; lactic acidosis 

Adjust dose with CrCl 

&lt;50 mL/min  

Serum creatinine at baseline; 

if at risk for renal impairment, 

serum creatinine and 

phosphorus, and urine glucose 

and protein at least annually  

Consider bone density study at 

baseline and during treatment 

in persons with history of 

fracture or risks for osteopenia 

Lactic acid levels if clinical 

concern 

Tenofovir 

alafenamide 

(TAF) 

Vemlidy 

25 mg by mouth 

daily 

Take with food 

No human data in 

pregnancy 

No adverse effects 

observed in animal 

studies 

Headache (12%) 

Lactic acidosis/ 

severe 

hepatomegaly with 

steatosis is a 

warning for 

tenofovir AF due to 

rare reports with 

use of tenofovir DF  

Avoid with CrCl &lt;15 mL/min if 

not receiving hemodialysis 

Dose after HD in those on HD 

If at risk for renal impairment, 

serum creatinine and 

phosphorus, and urine glucose 

and protein as clinically 

indicated.  

Lactic acid levels if clinical 

concern 

1 In 2015, the US FDA replaced the pregnancy risk designation by letters A, B, C, D, and X with more specific language on pregnancy and 

lactation. This new labeling is being phased in gradually and, to date, only tenofovir alafenamide includes these additional data.  

2 Decompensated liver disease defined as Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) ≥7 (see Hepatitis B Online CTP calculator). 


7 

Last updated February 25, 2020 

 Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) Surveillance 

Indications for HCC Surveillance 

Persons with chronic HBV at increased risk for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) who require routine 

surveillance include:  

&gt; All persons with cirrhosis, including persons who become HBsAg(-) 

&gt; The following populations, even in the absence of cirrhosis: 

 Asian or black/African1 males older than 40 years of age 

 Asian females older than 50 years of age 

 Persons with a family history of HCC  

 Persons with hepatitis D virus coinfection 

Recommended HCC Surveillance Method 

HCC surveillance should be performed in the primary care setting with liver ultrasound with or without 

serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)2 every 6 months. More frequent monitoring or other imaging modalities 

such as computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), with and without contrast, may 

be indicated to further evaluate new liver lesions.  

 

1 More recent African immigrants may be at increased risk for HCC and some experts begin HCC surveillance at age &lt;40 years. 

2 Wait at least 6 months after pregnancy before using AFP for HCC surveillance.  


8 

Last updated February 25, 2020 

 Perinatal HBV Management 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 All pregnant women should be screened for HBV (with HBsAg at minimum) during each pregnancy, regardless of prior HBV screening 

results. For complete HBV profile, add anti-HBs to determine immunity and anti-HBc IgG or total for evidence of prior infection. 

2 All HBsAg(+) mothers should be educated on the importance of regular follow-up during and after the pregnancy so that appropriate 

HBV monitoring can occur. 

3 Engerix-B and Recombivax-HB are safe to give at any time during pregnancy. Due to insufficient data, Heplisav-B vaccine is not 

recommended during pregnancy. 

4 If an HBsAg(+) woman is already on antiviral therapy when she becomes pregnant, the antiviral regimen should immediately be 

switched to tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (if she is not already taking this medication). 

5 For infants weighing less than 2,000 grams, the birth dose does not count toward the vaccine series and the infant should receive 

another HBV vaccine one month after birth. 

ALL infants of HBsAg(-) women should: 

&gt; Receive birth dose HBV vaccine within 

24 hours of birth 

 

ALL infants of HBsAg(+) women should: 

&gt; Receive birth dose HBV vaccine and 

HBIG within 12 hours of birth 

&gt; Complete HBV vaccine series on 

schedule5 

&gt; Receive a post-vaccination serology 

test at 9 to 12 months of age with 

HBsAg and anti-HBs to assess for 

mother-to-child transmission and 

confirm immunity 

 

 

 

 

Abbreviations 

MTCT – mother-to-child transmission 

TDF – tenofovir disoproxil fumarate  

HBIG – hepatitis B immune globuline 

HBV and Breastfeeding 

All HBsAg(+) mothers, including those on TDF, 

should be educated on the value and safety of 

breastfeeding and that HBV is not transmitted 

through breastmilk.  

Breastfeeding mothers with cracked nipples 

should practice proper nipple care and be 

informed that HBV vaccination and HBIG will 

protect against transmission from such blood 

exposures. 

See HBV Serology Interpretation and 

Management (page 3) 

If HBV susceptible and at high risk 

for HBV infection, vaccinate during 

pregnancy3 

HBsAg(–) 

Screen for HBV during each pregnancy1 

Screen all household 

and sexual contacts  

for HBV 

See Initial Evaluation, Counseling, Management, and Treatment  

of the HBsAg(+) Patient (pages 4, 5, 6) 

If not on HBV treatment, recheck HBV 

DNA at 26 to 28 weeks gestation age 

to determine MTCT risk 

If treatment 

indicated for active 

HBV, start TDF 

and continue 

until stopping 

criteria met4 

HBV DNA 

200,000 IU/mL 

HBV DNA 

&gt;200,000 IU/mL 

High risk for 

MTCT, start TDF 

between 

28 to 32 weeks  

Stop TDF at 

time of birth 

and monitor for 

ALT flares at 

least every 3 

months for 

6 months 

HBsAg(+)2 

Low risk for 

MTCT,  

no HBV antiviral 

indicated 


9 

Last updated February 25, 2020 

 Selected References 

1. Abara WE, Qaseem A, Schillie S, McMahon BJ, Harris AM; High Value Care Task Force of the American 

College of Physicians and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hepatitis B vaccination, 

screening, and linkage to care: best practice advice. From the American College of Physicians and the 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Ann Intern Med. 2017; 167:794-804. [PMID: 29159414] 

2. LeFevre ML; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for hepatitis B virus infection in 

nonpregnant adolescents and adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. 

Ann Intern Med. 2014; 161:58-66. [PMID: 24863637] 

3. Pan CQ, Duan Z, Dai E, et al.  Tenofovir to prevent hepatitis B transmission in mothers with high viral 

load. N Engl J Med. 2016; 374:2324-34. [PMID: 27305192] 

4. Patel EU, Thio CL, Boon D, Thomas DL, Tobian AAR. Prevalence of hepatitis B and hepatitis D virus 

infections in the United States, 2011–2016. Clin Infect Dis. 2019;69:709-12. [PMID: 30605508] 

5.   Perrillo RP, Gish R, Falck-Ytter YT. American Gastroenterological Association Institute technical review 

on prevention and treatment of hepatitis B virus reactivation during immunosuppressive drug 

therapy. Gastroenterology. 2015;148:221-244.e3. [PMID: 25447852] 

6. Schillie S, Vellozzi C, Reingold A, Harris A, Haber P, Ward JW, Nelson NP. Prevention of Hepatitis B 

Virus Infection in the United States: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 

Practices. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2018; 67: 1-31. [PMID: 29939980] 

7. Schillie S, Harris A, Link-Gelles R, Romero J, Ward J, Nelson N. Recommendations of the Advisory 

Committee on Immunization Practices for Use of a Hepatitis B Vaccine with a Novel Adjuvant. MMWR 

Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2018; 67:455–8. [PMID: 29672472] 

8. Tang LSY, Covert E, Wilson E, Kottilil S. Chronic Hepatitis B Infection: A Review. JAMA. 2018;319:1802-

13. [PMID 29715359] 

9. Terrault NA, Lok ASF, McMahon BJ, et al. Update on prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of chronic 

hepatitis B: AASLD 2018 hepatitis B guidance. Hepatology. 2018; 67:1560-99. [PMID 29405329] 

10. Terrault NA, Bzowej NH, Chang KM, Hwang JP, Jonas MM, Murad MH; American Association for the 

Study of Liver Diseases. AASLD guidelines for treatment of chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology. 

2016;63;261-83. [PMID 26566064] 

11. Yang JD, Mohamed EA, Aziz AO, et al. Characteristics, management, and outcomes of patients with 

hepatocellular carcinoma in Africa: a multicountry observational study from the Africa Liver Cancer 

Consortium. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;2:103-11.[PMID: 28403980] 

12. US Preventive Services Task Force, Owens DK, Davidson KW, et al. Screening for Hepatitis B Virus 

Infection in Pregnant Women: US Preventive Services Task Force Reaffirmation Recommendation 

Statement. JAMA. 2019; 322:349-54. [PMID: 31334800] 

 


10 

Last updated February 25, 2020 

 HBV Primary Care Workgroup Members* 

 

HBV GUIDANCE CO-CHAIRS 

Amy S. Tang, MD 

Karla Thornton, MD, MPH 

HEPATOLOGY 

Eric W. Chak, MD, MPH 

Assistant Professor of Medicine  

Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology  

UC Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center 

Robert G. Gish, MD 

Medical Director 

Hepatitis B Foundation 

Anna S. Lok, MD 

Alice Lohrman Andrews Research Professor of Hepatology 

Professor of Internal Medicine 

Director of Clinical Hepatology 

Assistant Dean for Clinical Research 

University of Michigan Medical School 

Brian J. McMahon, MD 

Medical and Research Director, Liver Disease and  

Viral Hepatitis Program 

Alaska Native Medical Center 

Lewis R. Roberts, MB, ChB, PhD 

Peter and Frances Georgeson Professor of  

Gastroenterology Cancer Research 

Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology   

Mayo Clinic 

Norah A. Terrault, MD, MPH  

Professor of Medicine  

Chief, Division of Gastroenterology and Liver 

Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California 

INFECTIOUS DISEASES 

Camilla S. Graham, MD, MPH 

Co-Director, Viral Hepatitis Center  

Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 

David H. Spach, MD 

Professor of Medicine  

Division of Infectious Diseases 

University of Washington 

Mark S. Sulkowski, MD 

Medical Director, Viral Hepatitis Center  

Professor of Medicine 

John Hopkins University and Medicine 

Karla Thornton, MD, MPH 

Professor, Division of Infectious Diseases 

Senior Associate Director, Project ECHO Viral Hepatitis Programs 

University of New Mexico Health Science Center 

PHARMACY 

Paulina Deming, Pharm D 

Associate Professor of Pharmacy Practice 

Assistant Director, Project ECHO Viral Hepatitis Programs 

University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center 

PRIMARY CARE 

Richard Andrews, MD, MPH 

Co-Chair, National Taskforce on Hepatitis B 

Viral Hepatitis Director 

HOPE Clinic, Houston, TX 

Amy S. Tang, MD 

Co-Chair, National Taskforce on Hepatitis B 

Director of Immigrant Health  

North East Medical Services, San Francisco, CA 

Grace Wang, MD, MPH 

Family Physician 

International Community Health Services 

Su Wang, MD, MPH 

Medical Director, Center for Asian Health 

Saint Barnabas Medical Center 

President-Elect, World Hepatitis Alliance 

PUBLIC HEALTH 

Moon S. Chen Jr., PhD, MPH 

Professor and Associate Director for Population Sciences and 

Community Outreach/Engagement 

UC Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center 

Chari Cohen, DrPH, MPH 

Senior Vice President 

Hepatitis B Foundation 

Stuart Fong, MD 

Governing Counsel Chair  

San Francisco Hep B Free – Bay Area 

Aaron M. Harris, MD, MPH 

Team Lead (Acting), Prevention Branch 

Division of Viral Hepatitis,  

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 

Rita K. Kuwahara, MD, MIH 

Hepatitis B Policy Fellow 

Association of Asian Pacific Community Health Organizations 

(AAPCHO) 

Richard So, MPH, MPA 

Executive Director  

SF Hep B Free – Bay Area 

Ann Winters, MD 

Medical Director, Viral Hepatitis Program 

New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene 

 

Additional Workgroup Support from:  

Melanie Bird, PhD 

Clinical Policies Strategist 

American Academy of Family Physicians 

Jennifer Lim 

Data Manager 

South Central AIDS Education and Training Center (SCAETC) 

ECHO Institute 

University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center 

Amir Qaseem, MD, PhD  

Vice President, Clinical Policy and Center for Evidence Reviews 

American College of Physicians 

Amy Trang, PhD, M.Ed  

Administrator 

National Taskforce on Hepatitis B 

 

* Committee participation in the HBV Primary Care Workgroup does not constitute organizational endorsement of the 

recommendations or conclusions. 


11 

Last updated February 25, 2020 

 Disclosures 

The following workgroup members had no disclosures: Melanie Bird, PhD; Eric W. Chak, MD, MPH; 

Moon S. Chen Jr., PhD, MPH; Paulina Deming, PharmD; Stuart Fong, MD; Camilla S. Graham, MD, MPH; 

Aaron M. Harris, MD, MPH; Rita K. Kuwahara, MD, MIH; Jennifer Lim; Amir Qaseem, MD, PhD; 

Richard So, MPH, MPA; David H. Spach, MD; Karla Thornton, MD, MPH; Amy Trang, PhD, M.Ed; 

Grace Wang, MD, MPH. 

Workgroup 

Member Name 

Research Grant or 

Research Support 

Speakers Bureaus/ 

Honoraria 

Consultant/ 

Advisory Board 

Stock Shareholder 

(directly purchased) 

Richard Andrews, MD, 

MPH 

 

Med-IQ, Practicing 

Clinicians Exchange 

Med-IQ 

 

Chari Cohen, DrPH, MPH 

Dynavax Technologies, 

Eiger 

BioPharmaceuticals, 

Gilead Sciences, 

Janssen (foundation)  

 

Hepatitis B stigma 

working group for 

Janssen, unpaid. 

 

Robert G. Gish, MD 

Gilead Sciences 

AbbVie, Bayer 

Pharmaceuticals, Bristol-

Meyers Squibb, Dova 

Pharmaceuticals, Eisai, 

Gilead Sciences, Intercept 

Pharmaceuticals 

See footnote 1 

Athenex, Cocrystal 

Pharma, Ribosciences, 

Triact Therapeutics 

See footnote 2 

Anna S. Lok, MD 

Assembly Biosciences, 

Bristol-Meyers Squibb, 

Gilead Sciences, 

TARGET 

PharmaSolutions 

 

CLEAR, Gilead 

Sciences, 

GlaxoSmithKline, 

Huahui, Roche, 

Spring Bank 

Pharmaceuticals, 

TARGET Pharma-

Solutions, Viravaxx 

 

Brian J. McMahon, MD 

Gilead Sciences  

(non-salary program) 

 

 

 

Lewis R. Roberts, MB, 

ChB, PhD 

ARIAD Pharmaceuticals, 

Bayer Pharmaceuticals, 

BTG International, 

Exact Sciences, Gilead 

Sciences, RedHill 

Biopharma, Wako 

Diagnostics 

Bayer Pharmaceuticals, 

Exact Sciences, Gilead 

Sciences, GRAIL, North 

American Center for 

Continuing Medical 

Education (NACCME), 

Wako Diagnostics 

Bayer 

Pharmaceuticals, 

Exact Sciences, 

Gilead Sciences, 

GRAIL, NACCME, QED 

Bioscience, Tavec, 

Wako Diagnostics 

 

Mark S. Sulkowski, MD 

AbbVie, Assembly 

Biosciences, Gilead 

Sciences, Janssen 

 

AbbVie, Arbutus 

Biopharma, Gilead 

Sciences, 

Immunocore 

 

Amy S. Tang, MD 

 

 

NYC Hep B Coalition 

Advisory Board, 

PRIME 

 

Norah A. Terrault, MD, 

MPH 

Gilead Sciences 

(institutional) 

 

 

 

Su Wang, MD, MPH 

Gilead Sciences 

 

 

 

Ann Winters, MD 

See footnote 3 

 

 

 

1 Dr. Robert G. Gish’s current activity with scientific or clinical advisory boards: Abbott, Abbvie, Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals, Bayer 

Pharmaceuticals, Dova Pharmaceuticals, Eiger BioPharmaceuticals, ENYO Pharma, Hatch Biofund, HepQuant, Intercept 

Pharmaceuticals, Janssen, Medimmune, Merck. In the last two years, Dr. Robert G. Gish has been a consultant or an advisor to: 

Abbott, AbbVie, Access Biologicals, Alexion Pharmaeuticals, Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals, Bayer Pharmaceuticals, Biocollections 

Worldwide, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eiger BioPharmaceuticals, Eisai, ENYO Pharma, eStudySite, Fujifilm/Wako, Gilead Sciences, HepaTx, 

HepQuant, Intercept Pharmaceuticals, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Janssen, Laboratory for Advanced Medicine, Lilly, Merck, Salix 

Pharmaceuticals, Shionogi, Quest Diagnostics, TRImaran Pharma, Viking Therapeutics. 

2 Dr. Robert G. Gish’s stock options: Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals, Athenex, Eiger BioPharmaceuticals, HepQuant 

3 The NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene has worked in collaboration with fiscal partners Public Health Solutions and the 

Fund for Public Health New York which received grant support from Gilead for viral hepatitis projects. 

