Foreword

In 2016, the World Health Organization and the U.S. National Academies 

of Science, Engineering, and Medicine declared that elimination of 

hepatitis B from the human population is possible. The strategies 

to achieve this will require both prevention and effective treatment. 

There is a growing sense of urgency and opportunity for finding 

transformational new therapies.

During the period of December 2016 to February 2017, the Hepatitis B 

Foundation convened a “virtual workshop” to consider the possibility of 

discovery of a cure for chronic hepatitis B infection, and the diseases with 

which it is associated, including liver cancer. More than 30 of the world’s 

leading experts contributed to the development of a detailed Research 

Agenda, a collective professional judgment on the research that is most 

likely to advance the discovery and development of curative therapies for 

hepatitis B. A brief summary of their recommendations is included in this 

overview. The Hepatitis B Foundation subsequently convened a second 

panel of five experts in health research funding to develop a Professional 

Judgment Budget detailing the funding needed to achieve a cure for HBV 

infection. Highlights of their analysis are also included in this report.

The time is right for an aggressive and vigorous research campaign to 

find a cure for chronic hepatitis B infection, because of the unacceptable 

morbidity and mortality of this serious liver disease in the U.S. and 

worldwide, and because recent advances in technology surrounding 

the problem make this a winnable battle. Indeed, there is an increasing 

optimism in the scientific community that a cure is possible.

The Public Health Consequences  

of Hepatitis B

Hepatitis B continues to be a significant public health problem in the U.S., 

and around the world. More than 250 million people worldwide, and up 

to 2 million in the U.S., are living with chronic, life-long hepatitis B virus 

(HBV) infection. People who develop a chronic HBV infection have a 

significant lifetime risk of premature death from liver failure, cirrhosis, and 

primary liver cancer.

HBV infection is preventable with a safe and effective vaccine. However, 

vaccine coverage is incomplete, and new infections continue to occur 

in unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated individuals (3 doses are 

required). For those with chronic HBV infection, there are now seven 

FDA-approved antiviral therapies that can help to keep the infection under 

control, and reduce the risk of liver damage or liver cancer. While these 

treatments are effective in managing the infection, there is still no cure 

for hepatitis B. People with chronic HBV face a lifetime of treatment and 

surveillance for disease progression. A complicating factor is that long-

term use of antiviral drugs can lead to mutations in the virus that allow it 

to become resistant to the drugs (Weinbaum, 2008).

Although the burden of most other cancers is declining in the U.S., liver 

cancer incidence and death rates have continued to increase. Routine 

screening can detect liver cancer at an early stage, when it can be treated 

and potentially cured. While everyone with chronic hepatitis B should 

be monitored for liver cancer,  only about 25 percent of HBV-infected 

individuals in the U.S. know that they are infected. Of those, less than 10 

percent receive antiviral treatment, and very few receive ongoing screening 

for early detection of liver cancer. As a result of gaps in HBV screening, 

treatment, and disease monitoring, along with the current lack of effective 

therapies for liver cancer, the 5-year survival rate for individuals with HBV-

associated liver cancer remains very low, about 16 percent (Cohen, 2011; 

McMahon, 2015; Ryerson, 2016).



President of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD), 2017

•  Up to 2 million people in 

the U.S. are chronically 

infected with the hepatitis 

B virus (HBV).

•  Worldwide, at least 

250 million people are 

chronically infected with 

HBV.

•  Up to 25% of people 

who have chronic HBV 

infection die prematurely 

from liver failure, 

cirrhosis, or liver cancer.

•  Nearly 800,000 deaths 

worldwide each year  

are associated with  

HBV infection  

(8-10,000 in U.S.).

Fast Facts: Hepatitis B

(CDC, 2017; NASEM, 2016, 2017; HHS, 2014)

•  More than half of the 

Americans living with  

chronic HBV infections are 

of Asian and Pacific Islander 

descent. Also at high risk  

are African immigrants.

Finding a cure for both hepatitis B and 

HBV-associated liver cancer is critical to 

reducing the devastating loss of life and 

productivity caused by HBV infection.

Curing HBV is a Winnable Battle

Recent reports from the U.S. National 

Academies of Science, Engineering and 

Medicine (NASEM, 2016, 2017) and the 

World Health Organization (WHO, 2016) 

agree that HBV could be eliminated by 2030, if effective treatment is found for 

people who are already infected. Current treatment relies on a limited number 

of approved antiviral drugs that suppress the virus, but do not cure the 

infection. In addition, drug-resistant strains of HBV have developed. Clearly, 

new therapeutic drugs are needed that can be used alone, or in combination 

with current approaches, to achieve better disease management and, 

ultimately, a lasting cure for hepatitis B.

In 2016, the International Coalition to Eliminate HBV (ICE-HBV) published 

broad goals for research on HBV infection, and global strategies for a 

coordinated approach to advance a cure (Revill, 2016). The Hepatitis B 

Foundation sought to build upon this effort, defining specific areas of priority 

research to create a road map for policymakers, funding organizations, and 

those planning long-term research strategies.

Surveying the Experts

Working with more than 30 leading scientists and clinicians in the fields of 

hepatitis B and liver cancer research, the Hepatitis B Foundation prepared 

a research agenda for filling the major gaps in basic science and clinical 

knowledge of HBV biology. The experts identified research projects they 

deemed important to the goal of finding a cure for hepatitis B and HBV-related 

complications, especially liver cancer. Their feedback provided the basis of 

a comprehensive scientific Roadmap for a Cure, outlining specific research 

priorities, and providing the rationale for their selection. Highlights of this 

research agenda are presented here. 

From a clinical perspective, the goal of HBV therapeutics is to reduce a 

patient’s risk of liver cancer, cirrhosis, and death due to liver disease. Ideally, 

the level of risk would be reduced such that it is comparable to that of 

someone who has never been infected with HBV, or perhaps more realistically, 

to that of someone who has fully recovered from an acute HBV infection 

(Block, 2013). Achieving this goal is ambitious, but the experts surveyed 

believe this is achievable with an aggressive, vigorous effort. Multiple parallel 

research approaches will be needed, because different strategies of treatment 

(including combination therapies) will be required depending upon the age of 

patients, length of time of infection, status of immune response, genotype of 

the infecting virus, and other variables (Bertoletti, 2015; McMahon, 2016).

•  HBV infection is preventable 

with a safe and effective 

vaccine. Coverage is 

incomplete, however, and 

new infections continue  

to occur.

•  There are 7 FDA-approved 

antiviral treatments for people 

with chronic HBV that can 

help to control the disease.

there is no cure for  

hepatitis B.

Broad Areas for Priority Research Action

The research agenda developed by the experts is organized into six broad areas 

of research action (see Table 1). Each of these broad areas is further divided into 

specific subcategories that are discussed in detail in the full report.  

Highlights are provided below.

Virology and Viral Therapeutics

Current treatments for hepatitis B work by inhibiting replication of the virus 

(specifically, by inhibiting the assembly of new viral DNA). The therapeutic 

benefit of targeting other functions that influence the viral life cycle remains 

largely unexplored. There are a handful of other virus-specified gene products 

that could serve as therapeutic targets, and there are possibly more (Block, 

2013). Other major HBV gene products that could potentially be therapeutically 

targeted include cccDNA, HBx, and the hepatitis B surface, core, and e antigens 

(HBsAg, HBcAg, and HBeAg, respectively). 

One area of HBV research where there is general consensus is the need to 

prioritize research on understanding the biology of HBV covalently closed 

circular DNA (cccDNA), and the mechanisms controlling its function. cccDNA 

is viral genomic DNA that persists in the cell nucleus of infected liver cells, and 

is essential for viral replication. cccDNA persistence is the reason that current 

antiviral therapies cannot be discontinued in patients with chronic infection, 

even after symptoms subside and levels of virus are low or undetectable.  

Virology

improve understanding 

of hbV virology; 

emphasize research 

to define the 

molecular mechanisms 

responsible for 

cccdnA biogenesis, 

homeostasis and 

decay; expand 

research on viral 

and host functions 

influencing the viral  

life cycle.

Immunology

improve understanding 

of adaptive and innate 

immunology of hbV 

acute, chronic, and 

resolved infections, 

and reactivation.

Viral

Therapeutics

develop hbV antiviral 

therapies against 

new viral and cellular 

targets; develop 

immunological 

approaches that 

selectively repress 

or eliminate hbV in 

infected cells.

Liver Cancer

improve understanding 

of molecular pathways 

leading to liver cancer.

Liver Cancer

Management

exploit understanding 

of molecular pathways 

leading to liver cancer 

for discovery and 

development of new 

early detection and 

management of the 

cancer.

Combined

• develop and standardize 

new research reagents 

and systems to study 

hbV and liver cancer 

for the purposes of 

drug discovery and 

development.

• establish new, and expand 

current, inter-institution 

and inter-laboratory 

collaborative networks for 

basic science discovery 

and validations.

• establish new, and expand 

upon current, clinical 

networks for therapeutic 

drug testing and validation, 

nationally and globally.

Broad Areas of Research.

It is cccDNA that is the source of rebounding virus levels after stopping antiviral 

treatment (McMahon 2016; Lok et al. 2016). A priority research question is if 

and how HBV cccDNA can be therapeutically targeted. It is thought that achieving 

sustained repression of HBV cccDNA within infected cells is a very high priority 

approach (Guo, 2015; Revill et al. 2016).  However, much about cccDNA remains to 

be elucidated, and a better understanding might be the fastest route to a cure.

How HBV cccDNA can be therapeutically targeted is a priority 

research question because it is associated with virus levels 

rebounding after antiviral treatment is stopped.

There is a growing consensus that the viral protein, HBx, has essential function 

in the growth of the virus (Seeger, 2015), and is perhaps involved in enabling 

transcription of HBV cccDNA.  If so, HBx could offer a viral protein target that, if 

inhibited, could repress HBV cccDNA transcription.  As such, understanding whether 

HBx is a potential target for new therapeutics is another priority research question.

HBsAg is an essential viral protein needed for the secretion and infectivity of the 

complete, newly replicated viruses from the liver cell (Seeger, 2015). To determine 

whether it could be a potential target for therapeutic intervention, a better 

understanding is needed of the broader role HBsAg plays in altering the immune 

response and causing disease. HBcAg, another essential viral protein, is involved in 

formation of the virus capsid (the virus’s outer protein shell). Reports suggest that 

HBcAg might also be involved in regulating genes in both the virus and the patient, 

and altering the immune response. Although the current evidence for this is limited, 

this area warrants research attention, and there are several drugs targeting capsid 

formation currently in development (Liang, 2015). The HBeAg is derived from 

HBcAg, and is secreted from infected liver cells (Seeger, 2015). Although its function 

is unclear, HBeAg has been associated with higher levels of circulating virus in the 

serum of HBV-infected individuals, and with regulation of host immune recognition 

of the virus (McMahon et al. 2014). A better understanding of the role HBeAg plays 

in advancing disease is a research priority.

The research agenda also discusses potentially inhibiting the activity of 

ribonuclease H (RNaseH), an essential viral gene product, and exploring the role of 

integrated HBV DNA in the development of chronic HBV infection (viral DNA that is 

sometimes found inserted into host cell chromosomes). It is certainly possible that 

there are other virus-specified gene products that could also be potential targets for 

antiviral intervention. 

“ i left my home in the marshall islands after being diagnosed with hepatitis b and liver cirrhosis 

and being told that nothing could be done for me there. i eventually moved to hawaii with my 

family, received a liver transplant, and made it through a very difficult recovery period. After 

this experience, my wife and i developed an education project, in collaboration with hep Free 

hawaii, to increase hepatitis b awareness among micronesian communities living in hawaii.

Why an HBV cure is important to me: A cure is important to me because hbV is one of 

the leading causes of death in my country. so many people have died and many others are 

awaiting their turns because of lack of a cure to save lives. i’m optimistic that one day a cure 

for hbV will be found.”

Hepatitis D Virology parallels HBV virology. Approximately 15 to 25 million people 

are infected with the hepatitis D virus (HDV) worldwide, and HDV superinfection 

of chronic HBV is usually associated with a far more aggressive disease than HBV 

infection alone (Noureddin, 2014). HDV requires HBV co-infection of the same liver 

cells to complete its viral life cycle (Hughes, 2011). Thus, elimination of HBV would 

be expected to result in elimination of HDV. There are unique virological and clinical 

challenges associated with HDV infection, and key research areas for HDV parallel 

those for HBV.

Immunology

Immune responses are critical in both resolving HBV infection and, conversely, 

in promotion of HBV disease. While most HBV infections in adults induce a 

robust immune response that results in resolution of the infection (Bertoletti, 

2015), chronic hepatitis B is characterized by an unbeneficial and inadequate 

immune response to HBV (Chisari, 1995). A better understanding of these 

immune responses is central to finding a cure, and is an extremely high priority 

for both clinical and basic research. It is also important to note that different viral 

genotypes may behave differently with respect to HBV disease progression and 

treatment response (Kim, 2011). Understanding the role of viral genotype on 

the development of disease and on drug sensitivity could provide clues for new 

strategies of intervention. 

Liver Cancer and Cirrhosis

Cirrhosis and liver cancer are potentially fatal consequences of chronic HBV 

infection. The incidence of both diseases is growing at an alarming rate in the U.S. 

and worldwide, and is of extremely high public health importance. Advances in 

the effective management of HBV, risk screening, and cancer surveillance can go a 

long way preventing disease. However, once established, these diseases must be 

managed, and new, more effective treatments are needed. A better understanding 

of the molecular mechanisms of liver cancer and cirrhosis, development of new 

therapeutics, and improved diagnostics for early detection of liver cancer are all 

critical research areas. 

Research Reagents and Experimental Models

The study of HBV and liver disease has been frustrated by a lack of critical 

research tools, ranging from experimental models to standardized controls. 

Current understanding of chronic HBV infection is largely based on observational 

clinical studies. The lack of biologically relevant animal models prevents better 

understanding of the immunological mechanism of chronic HBV infection. New 

animal models are needed that will allow, for example, for the critical experiments 

examining the impact of immune-restoration on the course of chronic HBV infection. 

While some research tools could be easily provided with minimal investment, 

new experimental systems will require greater investment of effort and funds, 

but will expedite the success of many of the proposed specific projects identified 

in the research agenda. In addition, current approaches to evaluating clinical trial 

endpoints may be inadequate for some of the potential therapeutic approaches 

being considered. Efforts to identify new biomarkers, or ways to redeploy currently 

available tests, will be important areas of research. 

Approximately 15 to 25 

million people are infected 

with HDV worldwide, and 

HDV in people with HBV is 

often associated with a far 

more aggressive disease 

than HBV alone

Cirrhosis and liver cancer are 

often fatal consequences…

and the incidence of both is 

growing at an alarming rate 

in the U.S. and worldwide.

Investment for a Cure: 

A Professional Judgment Budget

The Hepatitis B Foundation’s research agenda is a roadmap to cure hepatitis B. It 

represents the professional judgment of leading scientists of the critical questions 

that need to be answered in virology, immunology and liver cancer to accelerate 

the progress to cure hepatitis B and effectively treat liver cancer. To answer these 

questions, a separate panel identified specific scientific projects and aligned them 

with existing National Institutes of Health (NIH) funding mechanisms. We assumed 

the maximum length for each grant, and a high mid-point (70% of max) for each 

funding level. Using NIH funding levels for the identified research projects, a 

professional judgment budget was prepared representing the increased investment 

needed over the next six years to follow this scientific roadmap to cure hepatitis B.

The professional judgment budget projects a nearly $39 million average annual 

increase totaling an additional $232 million of NIH support needed over six 

years through 2023.The funding outlined in the professional judgment budget 

will support basic scientific studies, as well as translational and clinical research 

designed to achieve specific milestones identified in the roadmap to a cure. 

Investment for a Cure: Substantial Health and Economic Outcomes 

Health Outcomes:

A cure for hepatitis B will save approximately 169,200 lives in the U.S. by 2030, as 

reflected in Table 2, below (current level of projected deaths at the current level – 

188,000/column A less the reduction in deaths (column C – 18,800) if there were 

a cure). A review of Table 2 displays the consequences of not having a cure (or 

achieving an intermediate level of improved treatment and diagnosis) as well as 

the positive health outcomes if a cure for hepatitis B were in place.

•  If by 2030, there is no cure or improved diagnosis and treatment of chronic HBV, 

the health consequences of chronic HBV will be staggering – see column A,  

Table 2 (NASEM, 2017).

•  If by 2030, there is substantial improvement in treatment, outreach and 

diagnosis, the health outcomes are summarized in column B (WHO, 2016).

“ 15 years ago i adopted a beautiful chinese baby who was hepatitis b positive. Although my 

daughter’s initial medical records indicated she was healthy, i was told when i arrived in china 

that a blood test the day before had indicated she was hepatitis b positive. i cavalierly said, “Well, 

that’s ok, it’s a virus—she’ll get better, right?” i had so much to learn. one of the things i learned, 

however, was that managing a child’s hepatitis b is not life-consuming, especially if, as in my 

daughter’s case, there is no observable liver damage. i adopted a second daughter a few years 

later, who is also hepatitis b positive.

Why an HBV cure is important to me: An hbV cure is important to me because it will allow my 

daughters to enjoy their strength and energy, free from the shadow of a chronic condition.”

•  If by 2030, there is a cure, chronic HBV would be largely eliminated, assuming that 

10% of current rate of disease and death would remain primarily due to lack of 

access to therapeutic cure, small percent who do not respond to treatment and for 

those whose disease progression is beyond the range of treatment – see column C.

Economic Outcomes±

Aside from the human toll described above, the economic burden of chronic HBV 

needs to be considered. One measure is the enormous costs associated with treating 

HBV as summarized in Table 3. 

The human and economic costs described provide compelling evidence for the 

importance of investing in a cure for hepatitis B. With the current scientific 

understanding of HBV, pursuing this Roadmap for a Cure offers a well-defined 

scientific strategy for curing HBV within a decade.

± There are many sophisticated economic analyses that need to be performed to fully document the economic impact 

of curing HBV such as cost-benefit, incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) and quality-adjusted life–years 

(QALY) analyses. 

Moving Forward 

Conquering Hepatitis B Now!

The Facts

The following facts have been established by the 

Hepatitis B Foundation and other highly regarded 

public and private scientific authorities in the U.S. 

and the world:

•  Chronic Hepatitis B persists as an urgent public 

health threat, in the U.S. (2 million currently 

infected, with 8-10,000 deaths per year) and 

worldwide (250 million currently infected, with 

800,000 deaths per year);

•  Incidence of primary liver cancer in the U. S. is 

increasing, with a 5-year survival rate less than 

15%;

•  The potential for eliminating hepatitis B has 

been established by NASEM, WHO, and the 

International Coalition to Eliminate HBV;

•  NIH funding for hepatitis B is only $49 million per 

year and has declined almost 16% since 2012.

•  NIH has the research infrastructure needed to find 

a cure, with well-documented contributions in 

hepatitis research, and first-rate scientific capacity 

in understanding hepatitis B and liver cancer at 

NIAID, NIDDK and NCI; and,

•  The Hepatitis B Foundation has developed A 

Roadmap for a Cure: Priority Areas for Chronic 

Hepatitis B and Liver Cancer Research based on  

the findings of a “virtual panel” of more than  

30 leading scientific and clinical experts in 

hepatitis B and liver cancer. 

Conquering Hepatitis B Now! – 

Roadmap for a Cure

The Roadmap for a Cure is a comprehensive guide 

to the research necessary to cure hepatitis B, as well 

as estimates of the costs and time required. NIH has 

the research infrastructure needed to find a cure, 

with well-documented contributions in hepatitis 

research, and first-rate scientific capacity in 

understanding hepatitis B and liver cancer at NIAID, 

NIDDK and NCI. 

To be able to achieve this goal and conquer hepatitis 

B, the following actions need to be taken:

•  Develop a framework for a trans-NIH scientific 

meeting (including NIAID/NIDDK/NCI, and others) 

toward developing an HBV and liver cancer NIH 

Research Action Plan based on the Roadmap;

•  Explore a potential future clinical trials network 

expansion to evaluate new and emerging 

therapeutic agents and combination therapies;

•  Increase federal funding for hepatitis B research 

over the next six years at an additional $39 million 

per year needed to implement the Roadmap;

•  Issue targeted requests for proposals for HBV/

liver cancer research proposals (issued from 

NIAID, NIDDK and NCI); and

•  Identify ways of attracting private industry 

investment in new drug discovery for HBV and 

liver cancer.

We have the scientific and technological capability 

to find the cure and win the battle against hepatitis 

B. It is now time to fund the Roadmap and eliminate 

HBV infection.

“ At four months old i was adopted from china, according to my medical record,  

i didn’t have hepatitis b. two years later, my mother had me re-tested, and i tested positive.  

i’ve known about my hepatitis b since i was very young, with time i came to terms with it and 

yearly doctor visits just became part of my normal life. i’ve never had to be on medication as 

my viral load has always been low.

Why an HBV cure is important to me: An hbV cure is important to me because i want to be 

fully cured, i don’t just want to sero-convert and still be tested and observed. i want myself and 

others to be cured and not have to worry about it possibly becoming chronic.”

“ After receiving my diagnosis, i struggled to find any hepatitis b specialists in my hometown 

in Kansas. the first doctor who treated me had very little experience with hepatitis b/hiV co-

infections. she put me on a higher dose of medication, which led to me developing kidney 

disease. i finally found a caring and knowledgeable hepatologist 290 miles away in st. louis.  

he let me know that new medicines are coming down the pipeline and enrolled me into his 

cohort study to monitor what makes hep b better or worse.

Why an HBV cure is important to me: i can’t imagine anybody going through the 

emotional roller coaster that i went through when i discovered my hep b diagnosis. it’s a lot 

to take in. it’s a battle. every time i feel a pain on the right side of my abdomen, i ask myself,  

“is it liver cancer?” it’s a paranoid way to live. Without a cure, this is a struggle.  

A cure is like saying to me, “i’m Free to live.””