
On September 29, 2011, the United Network for Organ 

Sharing notified CDC of two patients who tested positive for 

hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection approximately 6 months 

after receiving kidney transplants from a deceased donor. 

Before transplantation, the donor had tested negative for HCV 

antibody by the organ procurement organization. Tissue also 

was procured from the donor for possible transplantation. The 

tissue bank performed an HCV antibody test on the donor’s 

serum specimen that was negative and nucleic acid testing 

(NAT) that was positive, but misread as negative. Retesting 

of the donor specimen during the investigation confirmed 

the NAT results as positive. Donated tissue included 43 

musculoskeletal grafts and one cardiopulmonary patch, which 

were distributed to health-care facilities in several states. An 

investigation was initiated to 1) identify potential sources of 

the donor’s infection, 2) document the mode of transmission 

to the organ recipients, and 3) ensure timely notification 

of the implanting surgeons and testing of tissue recipients. 

Implantation of infected HCV tissue occurred after recognition 

of new HCV infection in the organ transplant recipients, high-

lighting the need for rapid communication between transplant 

centers, organ procurement organizations, tissue banks, and 

public health authorities regarding suspected transplantation 

transmission events. 

Donor Investigation 

The donor, a middle-aged man in Kentucky, sustained a 

traumatic brain injury in March 2011 in an all-terrain vehicu-

lar incident and died 2 days later. His medical history was 

significant for schizophrenia, substance abuse, and a 5-month 

incarceration approximately 10 years before his death. The 

donor had no known history of intravenous drug use or other 

hepatitis risk factors, according to his father at the time of organ 

procurement; however, further investigation revealed that the 

donor’s father had limited contact with his son during the 

year before his death and was unfamiliar with recent personal 

habits or behaviors. 

Policies of the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network 

(OPTN), the oversight entity for solid organs in the United States, 

require testing for HCV by antibody only, whereas the Food and 

Drug Administration (FDA), which regulates human cells, tis-

sues, and cellular and tissue-based products, requires screening 

of donated tissue for HCV by both antibody and NAT (1). The 

donor’s HCV antibody tested negative on both organ and tissue 

donor screening, but misreading of the reaction wells on testing 

led to an incorrectly reported negative HCV NAT result. Once 

this error was identified, repeat NAT was performed at the tissue 

bank and confirmed that the donor was HCV-positive at the time 

of donation. During the donor’s final hospital stay in March, he 

received six units of blood products. Pretransfusion serum from 

the donor was not available for analysis. Testing of posttransfusion 

stored serum at CDC on October 28 confirmed by NAT that 

the donor was HCV-positive with genotype 1a and a viral load 

of >69,000,000 IU/mL. Blood traceback investigation of the six 

associated blood donors to the infected donor is ongoing, and all 

remaining units from these donations have been quarantined. 

Organ Transplant Investigation 

In March 2011, three organs (two kidneys and the liver) 

from the donor were transplanted into three recipients at a 

local hospital in Kentucky (Figure). Both kidney recipients had 

tested negative for hepatitis C before transplant, whereas the 

liver recipient had a previous diagnosis of hepatitis C. 

First kidney recipient. On July 26, 2011, the recipient of the 

first kidney, a man aged 41 years, was noted to have elevated liver 

enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase [AST]: 161 U/L; alanine 

aminotransaminase [ALT]: 217 U/L). HCV antibody testing 

conducted August 22 was negative. Liver function tests contin-

ued to be elevated, and HCV NAT performed September 19 

was positive. 

Second kidney recipient. The recipient of the second kidney, 

a woman aged 46 years, was noted to have elevated liver function 

tests on August 25 (AST: 206 U/L, ALT: 221 U/L); HCV NAT 

was positive September 21. 

Liver recipient. The liver recipient, a man aged 51 years, 

had a history of chronic infection with HCV, genotype 1a, 

before transplant. Liver function testing on September 7 was 

unchanged from his baseline (AST: 46 U/L, ALT: 55 U/L). 

At CDC, serum specimens were tested for HCV RNA. 

Serum collected after organ transplantation from all three 

recipients tested positive for HCV by NAT at CDC, and all 

three HCV strains were confirmed to be genotype 1a. 

Tissue Transplant Investigation 

On September 29, the organ procurement organization 

notified the tissue bank of the apparent HCV transmission 

to the kidney and liver recipients. The tissue bank informed 

health-care facilities, and a voluntary recall was begun on 

September 30. The tissue bank had distributed 43 musculo-

skeletal grafts and one cardiopulmonary patch to health-care 

facilities, but names and contact information for surgeons 

who implanted these tissues were not uniformly available at 

the time of recall. CDC telephone notification of all surgeons 

and requests for testing of all patients was completed on 

October 27. 

The cardiopulmonary patch, the only nonmusculoskeletal 

tissue distributed, had been treated with antibiotics by the 

tissue bank according to protocol and was implanted by a 

health-care facility in Massachusetts on September 26. After the 

health-care facility was notified, the recipient underwent test-

ing. Hepatitis C antibody was negative, but NAT was positive 

at 82,000 IU/mL; the recipient’s ALT was normal (12 U/L). 

The 43 distributed musculoskeletal grafts were treated chemi-

cally and by irradiation at the tissue bank, according to proto-

col. Fifteen of the musculoskeletal tissues were implanted; the 

remaining 28 were returned to the tissue bank. The 15 recipients 

of musculoskeletal tissues were recommended to receive HCV 

serologic testing and NAT immediately and again 6 months 

from the time of tissue implantation. As of December 16, initial 

test results from 14 of the musculoskeletal tissue recipients were 

known, and all were negative based on HCV NAT. 

Molecular Characterization of HCV Strains 

To determine the genetic relatedness among the HCV strains 

obtained from the donor, the two kidney recipients, the liver 

recipient, and the cardiopulmonary patch recipient, maximum 

likelihood phylogenetic trees were created (2). These analyses 

showed that two specimens from the donor and the three speci-

mens from the kidney recipients and cardiopulmonary patch 

recipient shared identical NS5b sequences; the liver recipient 

did not share these sequences, indicating previous infection. 

Quasispecies analysis was performed on the specimens that 

shared identical NS5b sequences (3). The E1-HVR1 quasi-

species sequences from the donor, the two kidney recipients, 

and the cardiopulmonary patch recipient clustered in a single 

group, indicating their close genetic relatedness consistent with 

a common source of HCV transmission. The donor and the 

two kidney recipients and one cardiopulmonary patch recipient 

had from two to 10 distinct E1-HVR1 sequences that shared 

from 99.7% to 100% similarity with each other. 

Editorial Note 

The transmission of HCV associated with transplanted 

organs and minimally processed tissue has been described 

previously, but this is the first recognized HCV transmission 

via a cardiopulmonary patch (4). Although correct reading 

of tissue donor NAT screening results would have prevented 

transmission through the tissue patch, the organ recipients still 

would have become infected because current OPTN policies 

for organ donor screening only require HCV serologic testing 

(1). Furthermore, positive organ donor NAT screening likely 

would have resulted in quarantine of potentially infected tissue. 

Use of NAT, in addition to anti-HCV serologic testing, has 

been proposed to decrease the risk for transmitting undetected 

HCV infection. However, no one test can uniformly detect all 

infections, either because of false-negative tests resulting from 

the window period, or assay-related issues, or, as described in 

this report, because of human error.

Without information regarding a donor’s behavioral risk 

factors, the assay selection and sensitivity of pretransplantation 

testing is critical. The incidence of HCV infection not detected 

by serologic screening for anti-HCV antibody varies from 

1 in 5,000 for normal-risk patients to 1 in 1,000 for patients at 

high risk (5). The window period (i.e., the time from exposure 

to detectable HCV antibody) has a mean of 65–70 days; this 

period is shortened to 3–5 days with use of NAT (6). A transplant 

facility’s decision to use an organ is based on the organ procure-

ment organization’s assessment of the donor’s risk status and on 

test results (5). Multiple factors, including the urgent need for 

a potentially life-saving transplant and informed consent of the 

transplant candidate must be considered when determining 

whether benefits of transplantation outweigh the risk for trans-

mitting HCV. The U.S. Public Health Service recently drafted 

guidelines recommending testing of all organ donors with NAT 

for HCV regardless of risk status (7). Even if test results are not 

available at the time of transplantation, results still can be used 

afterward to guide recipient evaluation and treatment. 

The diagnosis of HCV infection in two recipients of kidneys 

from the same donor should raise immediate suspicion of donor-

derived infection and reporting to OPTN and to local and state 

health departments as required by policy. Reporting to local 

and state health departments also should occur because acute 

HCV infection is a nationally notifiable disease. Reporting of 

suspected new diagnoses in organ recipients, including to tissue 

banks, should occur without delay, because such diagnoses might 

have implications for tissues that have not yet been transplanted. 

The events in this report demonstrate the importance of timely 

communication once a transplant transmission is suspected and 

the difficulty of tracking tissue to the patient or provider level 

should a potential transmission be recognized after tissue has been 

distributed. Although FDA requires that the tissue bank track the 

distribution of tissues down to the institutional level, no government 

regulations require tracking tissue to the patient level; hospitals are 

asked voluntarily to return a record, often a postcard, to the tissue 

bank to notify them of implantation of the tissue. Many health-care 

facilities have a mechanism to track tissue to the patient, although 

approaches are not standardized (8). Systems that facilitate real-time 

notification of possible disease transmission to tissue banks, organ 

procurement organizations, and other transplant centers do not 

exist, and development is hindered by the lack of standardized tissue 

nomenclature and identification standards (9,10). 

This investigation reveals several areas in which current detec-

tion and notification might be improved to prevent similar future 

transplant transmission events, including: 1) consideration of the 

use of HCV NAT for organ donors; 2) use of algorithms or other 

procedures to ensure accurate reading of test results and reduce 

human error; and 3) timely feedback of possible disease transmis-

sion in organ or tissue recipients to organ procurement organi-

zations, tissue banks, public health authorities, and regulators. 

What is already known on this topic? 

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) transmission from antibody-negative organ 

donors has been documented previously; nucleic acid testing 

(NAT) is required for tissue donors but not for organ donors. 

What is added by this report? 

A donor transmitted HCV to two kidney recipients and one 

tissue recipient because of a negative antibody test (a result of 

the window period) and an incorrectly read HCV NAT result. 

Implantation of infected tissue occurred after recognition of the 

infected organ transplant recipients, highlighting the need for 

more rapid methods to recognize and communicate informa-

tion on suspected transplantation transmission. 

What are the implications for public health practice? 

HCV antibody testing alone might not be adequate to detect 

disease in organ donors with acute infection or in recipients 

who are immunosuppressed. A real-time system for notification 

of disease clusters in transplant recipients is needed to prevent 

further use of tissue that tests positive for HCV or other 

infections. Suspected disease transmission through organ and 

tissue transplantation should be reported by clinicians to 

appropriate oversight organizations and public health authori-

ties without delay.  

In 2002, the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists 

(CSTE) conducted its first national food safety epidemiology 

capacity assessment (1), which provided the basis for devel-

opment of minimum performance standards to guide state 

and local foodborne disease control programs. During April 

2010, CSTE sent states a follow-up, web-based questionnaire 

to gather information about food safety–related workforce 

training and education, epidemiology and laboratory capacity, 

and information technology (IT) to support surveillance. This 

report summarizes the results of the assessment, which found 

that in 2010, states reported a need for 304 more full-time 

equivalent (FTE) employees working in food safety to reach 

full program capacity, with the greatest demand for master’s 

degree–level epidemiologists (50% of demand). Barriers to 

investigating foodborne outbreaks reported most often by 

states included delayed notification of the outbreak (reported 

by 41 states), lack of a sufficient number of foodborne safety 

staff members (29 states), lower prioritization of investigations 

(27 states), lack of ability to pay overtime (20 states), and 

lack of adequate epidemiology expertise (12 states). Strategies 

should be developed to increase the number of food safety staff 

members and enhance their training opportunities, address 

gaps in IT, and improve the relationship between state and 

local health departments and federal agencies collaborating 

on responses to foodborne disease outbreaks. 

The main objectives of the food safety epidemiology capac-

ity assessment were to count and characterize the food safety 

workforce in local, regional, and state health departments and 

to measure and evaluate core capacity to detect, investigate, 

and respond to foodborne diseases and outbreaks. After pilot 

testing, CSTE made the assessment available online to all states 

during April 2010. The assessment was sent to the state epide-

miologist and the lead foodborne disease epidemiologist in each 

state, with a suggestion for the latter to serve as respondent. All 

50 states participated, but not every state answered all ques-

tions. Capacity was defined for participants using a qualitative 

scale,* as validated in previous CSTE assessments (2–4). 

In 2010, a total of 787 FTEs were working as foodborne 

disease epidemiologists in state, regional, and local health 

departments in the United States. Of these, 616.5 (78%) 

had an epidemiology-related degree or had completed some 

coursework in epidemiology; 170.5 (22%) had only on-the-job 

training or no formal epidemiology training (Table). Formal 

education in epidemiology was highest at the state level, 

where most (73%) foodborne disease epidemiologists had an 

epidemiology degree. The proportion of personnel working 

as foodborne epidemiologists who had a nursing degree was 

substantially higher at the local level (19%) than at the regional 

(5%) or state (4%) level. States reported the need for an addi-

tional 304 FTEs to reach full program capacity, with the great-

est demand (50% of need) for master’s-level epidemiologists. 

The number of respondents with substantial-to-full capacity 

to use electronic laboratory reporting for foodborne diseases by 

laboratory type was highest for public health laboratories and 

lower for other laboratory types (i.e., hospital-based, reference, 

and other clinical). Forty-three states reported using a National 

Electronic Diseases Surveillance System–compliant database for 

maintaining enteric illness cases. Forty-two states reported using 

an electronic database housed at the state health department for 

outbreak investigations; 13 states used an electronic database at 

the local level. All respondents used CDC’s electronic Foodborne 

Outbreak Reporting System and National Outbreak Reporting 

System for reporting. Most states electronically recorded multiple 

variables related to cases of enteric illness, including laboratory 

results (49 states), epidemiologic risk factors (44), clinical symp-

toms (42), travel history (42), environmental exposures (42), 

food history (35), and food purchasing locales (30), as separate 

elements of their enteric illness case files. 

State capacity for completing tasks related to the investiga-

tion of sporadic cases of enteric illness caused by Salmonella and 

Escherichia coli O157 varied. Nearly all (49) states entered case 

data electronically for both pathogens; other tasks were generally 

more likely to be completed for E. coli O157 than for Salmonella, 

including collection of isolates (48 and 46 states, respectively), 

pulsed-field gel electrophoresis analysis (48 and 42), analysis of 

aggregate data (46 and 45), comparison of case classification to 

standard case definition (49 and 44), interview of patients (47 

and 39), and more intensive questionnaire review (42 and 38). 

Although states investigate foodborne disease outbreaks 

caused by numerous pathogens, they were more likely to inves-

tigate outbreaks associated with some pathogens than others. 

For specific pathogens, a history of investigating >75% of 

outbreaks was reported by the highest proportion of states for 

E. coli (86% of states), followed by Listeria (81%), Salmonella 

(78%), Campylobacter (73%), other foodborne pathogens 

(68%), and norovirus (55%). Conversely, a small but sub-

stantial proportion of states reported investigating <25% of 

outbreaks caused by these same pathogens: Campylobacter 

Food Safety Epidemiology Capacity in State Health Departments — 

United States, 2010 

* None means that none of the activity, knowledge, or resources described within 

the question were met; minimal capacity = 1%–24%, partial capacity = 

25%–49%, substantial capacity = 50%–74%, almost full capacity = 75%–99%, 

and full capacity = 100% of the activity, knowledge, or resources described 

within the question were met. 

(16% of states), Listeria (13%), E. coli (10%), norovirus (7%) 

and Salmonella (4%) (Figure 1). 

States were more likely to obtain stool specimens than food 

samples as part of foodborne outbreak investigations. Relatively 

few states reported always collecting either stool specimens 

(five states) or food (one state) samples associated with food-

borne disease outbreaks; 33 states collected stool specimens in 

50%–99% of outbreaks, and 36 states collected food samples 

in <50% of outbreaks. Thirty-nine states reported having 

performed 1–10 tracebacks of commercial products during 

the past 3 years; relatively few (seven states) had conducted 

≥11 tracebacks, and three states completed no tracebacks of 

commercial products during that period. 

All respondents reported barriers to investigating foodborne 

or enteric outbreaks. Barriers reported as either moderate 

or substantial by states included delayed notification of the 

outbreak (reported by 41 states), lack of sufficient number of 

foodborne safety staff members (29), lower prioritization of 

investigations (27), lack of ability to pay overtime (20), lack of 

adequate epidemiology expertise (12), difficulties working with 

in-state agencies (eight), constraints related to administrative 

support (eight), and difficulties working with other state or 

federal agencies (five) (Figure 2). 

In 2009, the Council to Improve Foodborne Outbreak 

Response (CIFOR) distributed to all states its Guidelines for 

Foodborne Disease Outbreak Response (5), which was intended to 

improve outbreak response. Among the states, 47 plan to read 

the document, 39 plan to distribute it, and 29 plan to review 

their practices against the recommendations in the Guidelines 

and the performance indicators therein. Few states reported 

plans to implement or incorporate the Guidelines into practice 

in the immediate future (27%). 

Editorial Note 

Ensuring adequate epidemiology capacity 

in foodborne disease programs is essential for 

the timely detection, investigation, control, 

and prevention of foodborne disease out-

breaks. Although national foodborne disease 

epidemiology and surveillance capacity has increased since the 

previous CSTE assessment (1), critical gaps remain. Levels of 

formal epidemiology education among foodborne disease epi-

demiologists, especially at the local level, were lower than those 

of the national epidemiology workforce. Foodborne diseases 

personnel at the local level, compared with those at state and 

regional/district levels, were less likely to have an epidemiology 

degree and more likely to have only on-the-job-training or no 

formal training in epidemiology (6,7); previous assessments 

show this to be particularly true of nurses working as epide-

miologists (8). States have a substantial need for additional 

FTEs, especially those with a master’s degree in epidemiology, 

to reach full capacity in foodborne diseases program capacity 

at the state, local, and regional/district levels. Many of the 

specific activities assessed in this study directly rely on having 

enough trained or competent personnel on hand to perform 

them (e.g., conducting commercial tracebacks and collection 

of stool and food specimens). Insufficient workforce capacity 

hinders the ability to conduct these activities and, therefore, 

reduces the quality and quantity of foodborne investigations 

carried out by states. 

Widespread use of electronic surveillance systems by states 

has increased the desirability and feasibility of electronic 

laboratory-based reporting and the potential for improving 

the timeliness of infectious disease reporting and response. 

However, improvement and investment in public health IT 

infrastructure is needed to respond adequately to foodborne 

disease outbreaks. Improvements have resulted from several 

years of federal preparedness funding targeting states’ develop-

ment of electronic surveillance and reporting systems. Despite 

these improvements, many states report that they lack core 

capacity, which has directly affected their ability to investi-

gate and control outbreaks of foodborne diseases and enteric 

illnesses. Data elements considered essential to routine surveil-

lance for foodborne diseases are collected inconsistently across 

states and some, such as food purchasing locale, are collected by 

few. States also lack adequate IT infrastructure, based on their 

reported lack of timely notification as the single most common 

barrier to completion of foodborne disease investigations. 

The findings in this report are subject to at least two limitations. 

First, state-level epidemiologists estimated current epidemiology 

capacity at regional/district and local levels. The methods 

used by responding states to estimate their own capacity were 

subjective and likely varied. Second, not all responding states 

answered every question. However, these findings still provide 

useful insight into foodborne disease epidemiology capacity 

at state and local levels. 

CSTE recommends an increase in the number of personnel 

working in foodborne disease epidemiology and surveillance 

in state and local health departments, and enhanced train-

ing opportunities, including use of the CSTE/CDC applied 

epidemiology competencies (6) and the CIFOR Guidelines 

for Foodborne Disease Outbreak Response (5). Increased invest-

ment in IT also is needed to realize greater improvements in 

foodborne disease outbreak capacity. 

Recommendations on the Use of Quadrivalent Human Papillomavirus Vaccine 

in Males — Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP), 2011 

On October 25, 2011, the Advisory Committee on Immunization 

Practices (ACIP) recommended routine use of quadrivalent 

human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine (HPV4; Gardasil, Merck 

& Co. Inc.) in males aged 11 or 12 years. ACIP also recom-

mended vaccination with HPV4 for males aged 13 through 

21 years who have not been vaccinated previously or who 

have not completed the 3-dose series; males aged 22 through 

26 years may be vaccinated. These recommendations replace 

the October 2009 ACIP guidance that HPV4 may be given to 

males aged 9 through 26 years (1). For these recommendations, 

ACIP considered information on vaccine efficacy (including 

data available since October 2009, on prevention of grade 2 

or 3 anal intraepithelial neoplasia [AIN2/3], a precursor of 

anal cancer), vaccine safety, estimates of disease and cancer 

resulting from HPV, cost-effectiveness, and programmatic con-

siderations. The evidence for HPV4 vaccination of males was 

evaluated using Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 

Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) methods (2). 

Background of HPV Vaccination Program in the 

United States 

HPV4 is directed against HPV types 6, 11, 16, and 18, and 

was licensed by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for 

use in females in June 2006. Bivalent HPV vaccine (HPV2; 

Cervarix, GlaxoSmithKline) is directed against HPV 16 and 

18, and was licensed for use in females in October 2009. 

ACIP recommends either vaccine for routine use in females 

aged 11 or 12 years (3). In 2009, HPV4 was licensed for use 

in males for prevention of genital warts; in December 2010, 

FDA added prevention of anal cancer in males and females as 

an indication for use (4). Since 2006, HPV vaccine coverage in 

females has increased but remains low. In 2010, coverage with 

at least 1 dose among females aged 13 through 17 years was 

48.7%, and 3-dose coverage was 32.0% (5). Coverage with at 

least 1 dose among males aged 13 through 17 years was <2%. 

Burden of Disease and Cancer in Males 

HPV-associated cancers in males include some anal, penile, 

and oropharyngeal cancers caused primarily by HPV 16 (6–9). 

An estimated 22,000 HPV 16- and 18-associated cancers occur 

annually in the United States, including an estimated 7,000 

HPV 16- and 18-associated cancers in males (9). Data from 

U.S. cancer registries have shown increases in the incidence 

of oropharyngeal and anal cancers in men (8,9); an evaluation 

of data from 1973–2007 found increases of 1% per year for 

oropharyngeal cancers and 3% per year for anal cancers (9). 

Nononcogenic HPV types, primarily 6 and 11, cause >90% 

of genital warts (condylomata) and most cases of recurrent 

respiratory papillomatosis. Approximately 250,000 cases of 

genital warts occur each year in the United States among sexu-

ally active males (10,11). 

Efficacy 

In a phase III efficacy trial, HPV4 had high efficacy for pre-

vention of genital warts among 4,055 males aged 16 through 

26 years. Exclusion criteria included history of genital warts, 

history of genital lesions possibly HPV-related, and less than 

one or more than five lifetime sex partners. Among those who 

received all 3 vaccine doses and were seronegative at day 1 

and DNA-negative day 1 through month 7 to the respective 

HPV type (per protocol population), efficacy for prevention 

of HPV 6-, 11-, 16-, and 18-related genital warts was 89.3% 

(95% confidence interval [CI] = 65.3%–97.9%); efficacy for 

HPV 6- and 11-related genital warts was similar. Efficacy for 

prevention of HPV 6-, 11-, 16- and 18-related genital warts 

among males who received at least 1 vaccine dose, regardless 

of baseline infection or serology (intent to treat population), 

was 68.1% (CI = 48.8%–80.7%) (4). No efficacy was observed 

among males who were infected with the respective HPV 

type at baseline. Although grade 1, 2, and 3 penile/perineal/

perianal intraepithelial neoplasias were evaluated, too few were 

observed, and efficacy was not demonstrated (4). 

A substudy of the phase III efficacy trial included 598 

men who have sex with men (MSM), aged 16 through 26 

years; outcomes were genital warts; AIN grades 1, 2, or 3 

(AIN1/2/3); and AIN2/3. Per protocol efficacy for preven-

tion of HPV  6-, 11-, 16-, and 18-related genital warts was 

88.1% (CI = 13.9%–99.7%) (Carlos Sattler, MD, Merck, 

personal communication, August 2011). Per protocol efficacy 

for prevention of HPV 6-, 11-, 16-, 18- related AIN1/2/3 

was 77.5% (CI = 39.6%–93.3%), and against AIN2/3 was 

74.9% (CI = 8.8%–95.4%) (Table) (4). In the intent to treat 

population, efficacy for prevention of HPV 6-, 11-, 16-, 

and 18-related AIN1/2/3 was 50.3% (CI = 25.7%–67.2%), 

and prevention of HPV 6-, 11-, 16-, and 18-related AIN2/3 

was 54.2% (CI = 18.0%–75.3%) (4). In the intent to treat 

population, efficacy for prevention of any HPV type-related 

AIN2/3 was 24.3% (CI = -13.8%–50.0%) (4). No studies have 

evaluated the efficacy of HPV4 for prevention of recurrent 

respiratory papillomatosis or oropharyngeal cancer. 

The efficacy of HPV4 for prevention of HPV-related pre-

cancerous lesions and disease is supported further by studies 

among females. In three trials, HPV4 had high efficacy (>98%) 

for prevention of HPV 6-, 11-, 16-, and 18-related grade 2 or 3 

cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN2/3) or adenocarcinoma 

in situ (AIS), grade 2 or 3 vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia 

(VIN2/3), and grade 2 or 3 vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia 

(VaIN2/3) (12). 

Immunogenicity 

Data on immunogenicity in males are available from the 

phase III trial conducted among males aged 16 through 

26 years and from bridging immunogenicity studies conducted 

among males aged 9 through 15 years (4). Seroconversion was 

high for all four HPV vaccine types and postvaccination anti-

body titers were significantly higher in males aged 9 through 

15 years compared with males aged 16 through 26 years (4). 

Data from a follow-up study of 500 boys who were in an 

immunogenicity study showed no cases of persistent infec-

tion or disease related to any of the four HPV vaccine types 

during 6 years of follow-up (13). The high efficacy found in 

the clinical trials in females and males to date has not allowed 

identification of a minimum protective antibody titer. 

Safety 

Clinical trial data in approximately 5,300 males found that 

the most common adverse events were mild or moderate, and 

were most commonly injection-site reactions (4). Headache 

and fever were the most commonly reported systemic adverse 

events in vaccine recipients and controls (4). Since licensure, 

at least 40 million doses of HPV4 have been distributed in the 

United States through September 2011. National postlicensure 

safety data indicate that HPV4 adverse events were similar to 

those from prelicensure trials (14). Postlicensure safety data 

from the Vaccine Safety Datalink study, including data from 

>600,000 HPV4 doses administered, showed no statistically 

significant increased risk for the outcomes studied, including 

Guillain-Barré syndrome, stroke, venous thromboembolism, 

appendicitis, seizures, syncope, allergic reactions, and ana-

phylaxis (15). Postlicensure safety data from a manufacturer-

sponsored study found no increased risk for outcomes such as 

anaphylaxis and venous thromboembolism; however, persons 

who were vaccinated with HPV4 were more likely to faint on 

the day they were vaccinated than another period in which 

vaccine was not administered (16). ACIP recommends that 

vaccination providers should consider observing patients for 

15 minutes after all vaccinations, including HPV vaccination. 

Cost-Effectiveness 

The cost-effectiveness* of male vaccination is sensitive to a 

range of assumptions, such as vaccine efficacy, vaccine cover-

age of females, the range of health outcomes included, and the 

effect of HPV-associated diseases on quality of life (17–20). 

Adding male vaccination to female-only vaccination becomes 

more cost-effective when all HPV-associated health outcomes 

are included in the model and vaccine coverage of females is 

low (e.g., 3-dose vaccine coverage <50% by age 12 years). 

Adding male vaccination to female-only vaccination becomes 

less cost-effective when considering scenarios such as only 

the health outcomes for which evidence of vaccine efficacy is 

available, when vaccine coverage of females is high (such as 

3-dose vaccine coverage >70% by age 12 years), if vaccinated 

males have mostly vaccinated sex partners, and when male 

vaccination is compared with a strategy of increased vaccine 

coverage of females (20). At the current vaccine price, adding 

male vaccination at age 12 years to a female-only vaccination  

strategy would cost approximately $20,000–$40,000 per 

quality-adjusted life year (QALY) in the more favorable 

scenarios and approximately $75,000 to >$250,000 per QALY 

in less favorable scenarios (18–20). Vaccination of adult males 

becomes less cost-effective as age at vaccination increases, and 

models suggest the cost per QALY gained by vaccinating males 

>21 years would be approximately 2–4 times that of vaccinat-

ing males aged <18 years (21). 

Special Populations 

MSM are at higher risk for conditions associated with HPV 

types 6, 11, 16, and 18 than are heterosexual men; diseases 

and cancers that have a higher incidence among MSM include 

AIN, anal cancers, and genital warts (22,23). HPV4 clinical 

trial data demonstrated high efficacy for prevention of genital 

warts, AIN1/2/3, and AIN2/3 (4). HPV4 is not licensed for 

males aged >26 years, and no information is available on the 

efficacy for prevention of outcomes in MSM aged >26 years. 

A cost-effectiveness analysis estimated <$50,000 per QALY 

for vaccination of MSM through age 26 years, using various 

assumptions (24). 

Persons infected with the human immunodeficiency virus 

(HIV) also have a high burden of HPV-associated outcomes. 

Genital warts are more common and more difficult to treat in 

HIV-infected persons (25). AIN and anal cancer are common 

in HIV-infected MSM, and data suggest that effective antiret-

roviral therapy has not reduced the burden of anal cancer (26). 

One small trial in HIV-infected boys and girls found HPV4 to 

be safe and immunogenic (27), as did a study in HIV-infected 

men (28). Antibody titers to vaccine types 6 and 18 were lower 

in HIV-infected children than those observed in age-matched 

HIV-uninfected children; the clinical significance of this is 

not known (27). Ongoing studies will evaluate the efficacy 

and duration of immune response in HIV-infected persons. 

GRADE 

Data on HPV4 for males were reviewed according to 

GRADE methods (2). Factors considered in determining the 

recommendation included benefits and harms, evidence type, 

values and preferences, and health economic analysis.† 

Rationale 

Although the largest number of HPV-associated cancers 

occur in women (approximately 15,000 HPV 16- and 

18-associated cancers each year), an estimated 7,000 HPV 

16- and 18-associated cancers occur each year in men in the 

United States. These include anal, oropharyngeal, and penile 

cancers. HPV4 has high efficacy for prevention of genital warts, 

AIN1/2/3, and AIN2/3 in males. HPV4 also has high efficacy 

for prevention of genital warts, CIN1/2/3 or AIS, CIN2/3, 

VIN2/3, and VaIN2/3 in females. Although data show HPV4 

prevents various outcomes, no data are available on the efficacy 

for prevention of oropharyngeal or penile cancers. Vaccination 

of males would provide direct benefits and likely would reduce 

HPV 6, 11, 16, and 18 transmission, and resulting infection, 

disease, and cancers in females (through herd immunity). 

However, no clinical efficacy data demonstrating that HPV4 

prevents HPV transmission are available. 

Because HPV4 is prophylactic, it would be most effective 

when given before exposure to HPV through sexual contact. 

The recommendation for vaccination at ages 11 or 12 years 

is supported by data from the efficacy trial, demonstrating 

highest efficacy in males who had no evidence of previous or 

current HPV vaccine type infection, data on sexual behavior 

in the United States, and immunogenicity studies show-

ing higher antibody titers after vaccination of males at ages 

9 through 15 years compared with those aged 16 through 

26 years. Other vaccines are recommended at age 11 or 12 

years, including HPV vaccine for females. The population level 

benefits decrease with increasing age at vaccination, especially 

after age 21 years. 

Recommendations 

ACIP recommends routine vaccination of males aged 11 or 

12 years with HPV4 administered as a 3-dose series (recom-

mendation category: A, evidence type: 2§). The vaccination 

series can be started beginning at age 9 years. Vaccination with 

HPV4 is recommended for males aged 13 through 21 years who 

have not been vaccinated previously or who have not completed 

the 3-dose series. Males aged 22 through 26 years may be vac-

cinated. Recommendations for administration and precautions 

are unchanged from previous recommendations (1). 

Recommendations for Special Populations 

HPV4 is not a live vaccine and can be administered to 

persons who are immunocompromised as a result of infec-

tion (including HIV), disease, or medications. The immune 

response and vaccine efficacy might be less than that in immu-

nocompetent persons. For immunocompromised males, ACIP 

recommends routine vaccination with HPV4 as for all males, 

and vaccination through age 26 years for those who have not 

been vaccinated previously or who have not completed the 

3-dose series. 

MSM are at higher risk for infection with HPV types 6, 11, 

16, and 18 and associated conditions, including genital warts 

and anal cancer. For MSM, ACIP recommends routine vac-

cination with HPV4 as for all males, and vaccination through 

age 26 years for those who have not been vaccinated previously 

or who have not completed the 3-dose series. 

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) causes acute and chronic infection of the 

liver leading to substantial morbidity and mortality. In the United 

States, since 1996, a total of 29 outbreaks of HBV infection in 

one or multiple long-term–care (LTC) facilities, including nursing 

homes and assisted-living facilities, were reported to CDC; of these, 

25 involved adults with diabetes receiving assisted blood glucose 

monitoring (1; CDC, unpublished data, 2011). These outbreaks 

prompted the Hepatitis Vaccines Work Group of the Advisory 

Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) to evaluate the 

risk for HBV infection among all adults with diagnosed diabetes. 

The Work Group reviewed HBV infection–related morbidity 

and mortality and the effectiveness of implementing infection 

prevention and control measures. The strength of scientific evi-

dence regarding protection was evaluated using the Grading of 

Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation 

(GRADE) methodology,* and safety, values, and cost-effectiveness 

were incorporated into a recommendation using the GRADE 

system. Based on the Work Group findings, on October 25, 2011, 

ACIP recommended that all previously unvaccinated adults aged 

19 through 59 years with diabetes mellitus (type 1 and type 2) be 

vaccinated against hepatitis B as soon as possible after a diagnosis of 

diabetes is made (recommendation category A). Data on the risk for 

hepatitis B among adults aged ≥60 years are less robust. Therefore, 

ACIP recommended that unvaccinated adults aged ≥60 years with 

diabetes may be vaccinated at the discretion of the treating clinician 

after assessing their risk and the likelihood of an adequate immune 

response to vaccination (recommendation category B). This report 

summarizes these recommendations and provides the rationale 

used by ACIP to inform their decision making. 

Risk for HBV Infection 

An estimate of the risk for HBV infection for adults with 

diabetes living in LTC facilities was not available; continuing 

outbreaks suggest that it might be substantial. The population 

risk for HBV infection among adults with diagnosed diabe-

tes was estimated from 865 confirmed cases of acute HBV 

infection reported during 2009–2010 from eight Emerging 

Infections Program (EIP) sites constituting approximately 

17% of the U.S. population. The analysis was restricted to 

persons aged ≥23 years because of high rates of vaccination 

among younger persons. In multivariate analyses that consid-

ered persons without hepatitis B–related risk behaviors (i.e., 

injection-drug use, male sex with a male, and sex with multiple 

partners), persons aged 23 through 59 years with diabetes had 

2.1 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.6–2.8) times the odds 

of developing acute hepatitis B as those without diabetes; 

the odds were 1.5 (CI = 0.9–2.5) times as likely for persons 

aged ≥60 years. The annual incidence of reported cases of 

acute HBV infection among adults with diabetes was 1.8 per 

100,000 (CI = 1.5–2.2) (2). Acute HBV infection incidence 

is underestimated; an additional 10.5 new cases of infection 

likely occurred for each reported, confirmed case (3). 

Data for the period 1999–2010 from the National Health and 

Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), a nationally rep-

resentative sample of the noninstitutionalized U.S. population, 

indicated a 60% (p<0.001) higher seroprevalence of antibody 

to hepatitis B core antigen (indicative of past or present HBV 

infection) overall among persons aged ≥18 years with diagnosed 

diabetes compared with those without diabetes. Stratified by 

age, the estimated prevalence ratios were 1.7 (CI = 1.3–2.2) for 

persons aged 18 through 59 years and 1.3 (CI = 1.0–1.6) for 

those aged ≥60 years (CDC, unpublished data, 2011). 

Morbidity and Mortality 

The severity of acute HBV infection among adults ranges from 

asymptomatic to fulminant hepatitis. National viral hepatitis 

surveillance data indicate that of the 3,371 acute HBV infec-

tions reported in 2009, 47% of the 2,126 infections for which 

information was available resulted in hospitalization, and 1% of 

the 1,900 infections for which information was available were 

fatal (3). Data from EIP for the period 2009–2010 indicated 

a higher case-fatality rate among acute HBV–infected persons 

with diagnosed diabetes compared with those without diabetes, 

although the difference was not statistically significant (5% versus 

2%, p=0.127) (2). Acute HBV infection progresses to chronic 

infection in approximately 5% of otherwise healthy adults (4), 

but is believed to be greater among older adults with diabetes (5). 

In the United States, an estimated 700,000 to 1.4 million persons 

are infected with HBV (3). Because chronic HBV infection can 

persist for decades, persons with chronic HBV infection are the 

reservoir for continuing HBV transmission. Chronic HBV infec-

tion is associated with high morbidity and mortality, leading to 

cirrhosis and liver cancer in ≥15% of affected adults (5). 

Diabetes is associated with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, includ-

ing its most severe form, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. A study of 

veterans without HBV infection indicated that adults with diabetes 

have approximately twice the risk for chronic nonalcoholic liver 

disease and hepatocellular carcinoma as those without diabetes (6). 

Infection Control 

HBV is highly infectious and environmentally stable (5); HBV 

can be transmitted by medical equipment that is contaminated 

with blood that is not visible to the unaided eye. Percutaneous 

exposures to HBV occur as a result of assisted monitoring of 

blood glucose (7) and other procedures involving instruments 

or parenteral treatments shared between persons. Lapses in 

infection control during assisted blood glucose monitoring that 

have led to HBV transmission include multipatient use of finger 

stick devices designed for single-patient use and inadequate 

disinfection and cleaning of blood glucose monitors between 

patients. Breaches have been documented in various settings, 

including LTC facilities, hospitals, community health centers, 

ambulatory surgical centers, private offices, homes, and health 

fairs (7; CDC, unpublished data, 2011). Initiatives are ongoing 

to encourage improvement in the design and labeling of devices 

used in diabetes monitoring and care, and for greater oversight 

and training of staff responsible for providing diabetes care.† 

Infection control guidelines for safe blood glucose monitoring 

have been available since 1990, and guidelines targeting LTC 

settings were published in 2005 (8). Since 1982, hepatitis B 

vaccination has been recommended for health-care personnel, 

including personnel exposed to blood in LTC settings, in con-

junction with meticulous attention to infection control practice 

(5,8). In addition, a recommendation for hepatitis B vaccination 

exists for persons beginning hemodialysis (5). 

Hepatitis B Vaccine 

Two single-antigen recombinant hepatitis B vaccines, 

Recombivax HB (Merck & Co., Inc.) and Engerix-B 

(GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals), and one combination hepa-

titis A and hepatitis B vaccine, Twinrix (GlaxoSmithKline 

Biologicals), are available in the United States. Hepatitis B vac-

cines have been used in the United States since 1982. Extensive 

data support their safety in all age groups (5). 

Hepatitis B vaccination usually consists of 3 doses of vac-

cine administered intramuscularly at 0, 1, and 6 months; other 

schedules are available. At younger ages, the immune response to 

vaccine is similar among adults with and without diabetes. The 

proportion of adults who achieve seroprotection (≥10 mIU/mL 

antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen [anti-HBs]) after receipt 

of the 3-dose vaccine series decreases with age, obesity, smoking, 

immunosuppression, and comorbid conditions including diabetes. 

When the antibody responses among older adults with and with-

out diabetes are compared, the response might be reduced among 

those with diabetes. A synthesis of available literature suggests a 

protective response is achieved after completion of the hepatitis 

B vaccine series in ≥90%, 80%, 65%, and <40% of adults with 

diabetes lacking comorbid conditions aged ≤40 years, 41 through 

59 years, 60 through 69 years, and ≥70 years, respectively (CDC, 

unpublished data, 2011). Revaccination with 1–3 additional doses 

of hepatitis B vaccine safely increases the proportion of adults who 

achieve a protective level of anti-HBs (≥10 mIU/mL) (5). The 

duration of protection against symptomatic and chronic HBV 

infection lasts >22 years among healthy vaccine responders (9); 

duration of immunity among persons with diabetes is unknown. 

Cost-Effectiveness 

The Hepatitis Vaccines Work Group developed economic 

models that yielded age-stratified calculations (base case) of the 

incremental cost per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) saved 

based on vaccinating adults with diabetes against hepatitis B.§ 

The estimated cost per QALY saved was $75,100 for persons aged 

20 through 59 years but increased substantially with increasing 

age. From a lifetime perspective, a one-time vaccination program 

consisting of a 3-dose series of hepatitis B vaccine, covering 10% 

of unvaccinated U.S. adults with diagnosed diabetes aged 20 

through 59 years (or approximately 528,047 persons) would be 

expected to prevent 4271 HBV infections, 467 hospitalizations, 

256 chronic cases, 33 cases of hepatocellular carcinoma, 13 liver 

transplants, and 130 deaths. Postvaccination serologic testing and 

revaccination would add considerable cost, with limited increase 

in disease protection (CDC, unpublished data, 2011). 

ACIP Recommendations 

On the basis of available information about HBV risk, morbid-

ity and mortality, available vaccines, age at diagnosis of diabetes, 

and cost-effectiveness, ACIP recommends the following: 

•	 Hepatitis	B	vaccination	should	be	administered	to	unvaccinated	

adults with diabetes mellitus who are aged 19 through 59 years 

(recommendation category A; evidence type 2). 

•	 Hepatitis	B	vaccination	may	be	administered	at	the	

discretion of the treating clinician to unvaccinated adults 

with diabetes mellitus who are aged ≥60 years 

(recommendation category B; evidence type 2). 

Remarks 

Continued efforts are needed to increase adherence to rec-

ommended infection control practice. Shared use of blood-

contaminated equipment increases the risk for exposure to 

bloodborne pathogens, including hepatitis C virus, human 

immunodeficiency virus, and HBV, which is highly infectious. 

Administration of the hepatitis B vaccine series should 

be completed as soon as feasible after diabetes is diagnosed. 

Available data do not confirm an advantage to any specific 

hepatitis B vaccine, dosage, or approved schedule for adults 

with diabetes. No serologic testing or additional hepatitis B 

vaccination is recommended for adults who received a com-

plete series of hepatitis B vaccinations at any time in the past. 

The hepatitis B vaccination series can be given safely to 

persons of any age, but current hepatitis B vaccines are less 

efficacious and less cost-effective among older adults. Evidence 

for the extent of increased risk for acute HBV infection among 

persons with diabetes who are aged ≥60 years is less strong than 

for younger persons with diabetes. In 2008, the median age of 

diabetes diagnosis was 53 years; two thirds of adult diabetes 

diagnoses were made before age 60 years.¶ 

Decisions to vaccinate adults with diabetes who are aged ≥60 

years of age should incorporate consideration of the patient’s 

likelihood of acquiring HBV infection, including the risk posed 

by an increased need for assisted blood-glucose monitoring in 

LTC facilities, the likelihood of experiencing chronic sequelae if 

infected with HBV, and the declining immunologic responses 

to vaccines that are associated with frailty, a geriatric syndrome 

characterized by decreased physiologic reserve and increased 

vulnerability, leading to early mortality in older adults (10). 

Hepatitis B vaccine may be administered during health-care 

visits scheduled for other purposes as long as minimum intervals 

between doses are observed; there is no maximum interval between 

doses that makes the hepatitis B vaccination series ineffective. 

In 2010, among employed adults aged 18–64 years who currently had asthma, 6.7% had been told their current asthma was work-

related. Among employed adults who had a skin condition, 5.8% had been told their skin condition was work-related. Among 

employed adults who had carpal tunnel syndrome, 69.4% had been told their carpal tunnel syndrome was work-related.  Men 

(61.1%) were less likely than women (73.2%) to have been told their carpal tunnel syndrome was work-related. No significant 

differences by sex for either work-related current asthma or skin conditions were observed. 

The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free 

of charge in electronic format. To receive an electronic copy each week, visit MMWR’s free subscription page at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/mmwrsubscribe.

html. Paper copy subscriptions are available through the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402; 

telephone 202-512-1800.

Data presented by the Notifiable Disease Data Team and 122 Cities Mortality Data Team in the weekly MMWR are provisional, based on weekly reports 

to CDC by state health departments. Address all inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for publication, to Editor, 

MMWR Series, Mailstop E-90, CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30333 or to mmwrq@cdc.gov. 

All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated.

Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations 

or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses 

listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication.