
SPECIAL ARTICLE

International Liver Cancer Association (ILCA) White Paper on

Biomarker Development for Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Amit G. Singal,1 Yujin Hoshida,1 David J. Pinato,2 Jorge Marrero,1 Jean-Charles Nault,3,4,5

Valerie Paradis,6 Nabihah Tayob,7 Morris Sherman,8 Young Suk Lim,9 Ziding Feng,10

Anna S. Lok,11 Jo Ann Rinaudo,12 Sudhir Srivastava,12 Josep M. Llovet,13,14,15 and

Augusto Villanueva13

1Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas,

Texas; 2Department of Surgery &amp; Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK; 3Service

d’hépatologie, Hôpital Jean Verdier, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris-Seine-Saint-Denis, Assistance-Publique Hôpitaux de Paris,

Bondy, France; 4Unité de Formation et de Recherche Santé Médecine et Biologie Humaine, Université Paris 13, Paris, France;

5Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Inserm, Sorbonne Université, Université Paris, INSERM UMR 118 Functional Genomics

of Solid Tumors Laboratory, F-75006, Paris, France; 6Pathology Department, Beaujon hospital, Clichy, University Paris, France;

7Department of Data Science, Dana Farber Cancer Institute; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston,

Massachusetts; 8University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 9Department of Gastroenterology, Liver Center, Asan

Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea; 10Biostatistics Program, Public Health

Science Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington; 11Division of Gastroenterology and

Hepatology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; 12Cancer Biomarker Research Group, Division of Cancer Prevention,

National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland; 13Division of Liver Diseases and Hematology/

Medical Oncology, Liver Cancer Program, Tisch Cancer Institute, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount

Sinai, New York, New York; 14Translational Research in Hepatic Oncology, Liver Unit, IDIBAPS, Hospital Clinic, University of

Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; and 15Institució Catalana d’Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain

Keywords: Liver Cancer; Biomarkers; Cirrhosis.

B

iomarkers are key components of the clinical man-

agement of patients with cancer, as they have

contributed to major survival improvements in these pa-

tients.1 According to the National Cancer Institute, a

biomarker is a biological molecule found in blood, other body

ﬂuids (eg, urine), or tissues that is a sign of a normal or

abnormal process, or of a condition or disease. They allow

classiﬁcation of patients based on common features and

facilitate risk stratiﬁcation, early detection, diagnosis, and

prediction of prognosis or treatment response. In hepatocel-

lular carcinoma (HCC), there are few biomarkers incorporated

in clinical practice despite a need to better stratify patients at

different steps of clinical management. However, this has been

an extensive area of research in recent years, with increasing

efforts to identify biomarkers across the cancer care contin-

uum from risk stratiﬁcation to early detection to prognosti-

cation and treatment response (Table 1, Figure 1).

One of the ﬁrst systematic sets of recommendations dealing

with biomarkers in cancer was introduced in 1996 by Hayes

et al,2 known as the Tumor Marker Utility Grading System

(TMGUS). These recommendations covered not only technical

aspects of assay development, but also issues related to clinical

utility and levels ofevidence. TMGUS was later expanded by the

Reporting recommendations for tumor marker prognostic

studies (REMARK) guidelines,3 a more focused approach on

recommendations for reporting prognostic biomarkers in

oncology. There have also been speciﬁc initiatives to describe

study design thoroughly for cancer biomarkers in speciﬁc

clinical scenarios, such as the Early Detection Research

Network (EDRN) publishing a framework for 5 phases of

biomarker development and validation for cancer screening.4

In brief, these phases extend from biomarker discovery

(phase I) to evaluation of biomarker performance (phases II-

III) and clinical beneﬁts and harms (phase IV-V) (Table 2).

Although these guidelines provide a useful general

framework of data elements required at each step, de-

viations from this framework may be possible or necessary

in speciﬁc circumstances. Further, modiﬁcations may be

required when applied to other clinical scenarios, including

risk stratiﬁcation and treatment response assessment.

Finally, singularities unique to HCC, particularly the coex-

istence of chronic liver disease in most patients, lead to

necessary

considerations

when

designing

biomarker

studies. To address these issues, the International Liver

Cancer Association has assembled a group of experts on

biomarker development to provide a framework on best

practices to design, execute, and interpret biomarker studies

for risk stratiﬁcation, early detection, diagnosis, prognosti-

cation, and treatment response assessment in HCC.

HCC Risk Stratiﬁcation

Rationale

Risk of HCC is elevated in patients with chronic liver

disease, particularly those with cirrhosis from any etiology,



Abbreviations used in this paper: AFP, alpha-fetoprotein; BCLC, Barce-

lona Clinic Liver Cancer staging system; CT, computed tomography; HBV,

hepatitis B virus; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; FPR, false positive rate;

MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NASH, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis;

OS, overall survival; PFS, progression-free survival; REMARK, Reporting

recommendations for tumor marker prognostic studies; RFS, recurrence-

free survival; TPR, true positive rate.



Most current article

© 2021 by the AGA Institute

0016-5085/$36.00

https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2021.01.233

Gastroenterology 2021;160:2572–2584

SPECIAL ARTICLE


and HCC is one of the leading causes of death in these pa-

tients.5 Contemporary cohorts, which have higher numbers

of patients with hepatitis C post-sustained viral response

and those with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), have

demonstrated an annual HCC risk of 1% to 3%, substantially

lower than the traditional annual HCC risk of 3% to 5%

from older cohorts.6,7 However, patient characteristics, such

as age, sex, race/ethnicity, and degree of ﬁbrosis, introduce

heterogeneity in HCC risk between patients.8 Subgroups of

patients with chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection

without cirrhosis, such as Asian men older than 40 years

and Asian women older than 50 years, have an annual HCC

incidence of 0.4% to 0.6%, whereas younger individuals

have a lower HCC incidence of 0.2%.

Reﬁned risk stratiﬁcation could have several implica-

tions for clinical practice, such as tailoring of HCC surveil-

lance intensity in the future and targeting chemoprevention

efforts (eg, coffee, lipophilic statins, aspirin9) to high-risk

persons. For example, the “one-size-ﬁts-all” surveillance

strategy of semi-annual ultrasound with or without alpha-

fetoprotein (AFP) could be tailored based on the individ-

ual HCC risk in each patient.10 Further, risk stratiﬁcation

biomarkers could help select patients for chemoprevention

clinical trials, thereby reducing necessary sample sizes and

making these trials more feasible.

Target Population

In addition to patients with cirrhosis, risk stratiﬁcation is

also needed for patients with chronic HBV infection or with

advanced ﬁbrosis, particularly in the setting of NASH or

post-sustained viral response. Although HCC can occur in

the absence of cirrhosis,11 patients without cirrhosis have a

low

annual

HCC

rate

and

surveillance

is

not

cost-

Table 1.Types of Biomarkers

Type of biomarker

Deﬁnition

Risk stratiﬁcation

Biomarker that predicts the future development of HCC in an at-risk patient

Early detection

Biomarker that detects HCC at an early tumor stage, when therapy can be delivered which would reduce

HCC-related mortality

Diagnosis

Biomarker that can conﬁrm or exclude presence of HCC in patients with a suspicious nodule or clinical

concern for HCC

Prognosis

Biomarker that predicts overall cancer outcome, regardless of treatment

Treatment response

Biomarker that predicts favorable or unfavorable response to a speciﬁc treatment

HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma.



Figure 1. Summary ﬁgure of the main clinical indications where biomarkers are needed to improve outcomes in patients with

HCC. A risk stratiﬁcation biomarker aims to predict future development of HCC and can differentiate high- and low-risk pa-

tients. An early detection biomarker aims to detect HCC at an early stage. A diagnostic biomarker can conﬁrm or exclude

presence of HCC in patients with clinical concern of HCC. A prognostic biomarker predicts cancer outcomes and can

differentiate favorable vs poor prognosis (eg, survival). A treatment response biomarker aims to predict favorable or unfa-

vorable response to treatment. Used with permission from ©Mount Sinai Health System.

June 2021

Biomarker Development for HCC 2573

SPECIAL ARTICLE


effective.12,13 Effective risk stratiﬁcation biomarkers may

identify subgroups of those with advanced ﬁbrosis but not

cirrhosis who would beneﬁt from surveillance.

Study Design and Outcomes

The EDRN framework for phases of biomarker evalua-

tion for early detection do not directly apply to risk strati-

ﬁcation, although several of the concepts are similar.

Derivation of risk stratiﬁcation biomarkers can be done in a

retrospective cohort and/or nested case-control study, in

which the biomarker assay would be assessed at baseline,

cases develop HCC during follow-up, and controls remain

HCC-free over equivalent or longer follow-up. The time

frame between biomarker assessment and HCC diagnosis

should be long enough (eg, &gt; 2 years) to minimize the

likelihood of detecting preexisting undetected tumoral dis-

ease. A 2-year time frame is recommended given the low

sensitivity of imaging to detect very early-stage HCC and

some patients with HCC exhibiting indolent growth patterns,

thereby

potentially

remaining

subclinical

for

many

months.14,15 Therefore, case-control studies with shorter

periods between biomarker assessment and HCC diagnosis

may confound a biomarker’s performance for risk stratiﬁ-

cation versus early detection (Figure 2).

When selecting patients for a nested case-control design,

cases and controls should be matched for known clinical

risk factors, such as age, gender, and etiology and severity of

liver disease. When available, archived biospecimens from a

prospective

cohort

study

(ie,

prospective-retrospective

design)

would

allow

more

reliable

estimation

of

biomarker performance based on time-to-event data anal-

ysis.16 As needed, early-phase validation can be conducted

in independent nested case-control studies or cohorts,

where model parameters and/or thresholds to deﬁne risk

groups could be further optimized. Late-phase validation is

then conducted in an adequately powered independent

prospective-retrospective or prospective cohort to compare

the HCC incidence rate between high-risk and low-risk

groups or assess association of the biomarker and HCC

incidence.

Biomarker performance should be evaluated using a

combination of several metrics. Overall model performance

(degree of variation explained by the biomarker panel) is

typically assessed by R2 or Brier scores. Discrimination

(ability to distinguish between patients who develop versus

do not develop HCC) is assessed by the magnitude of risk

separation between high-risk and low-risk groups measured

by ﬁtness of the model determined by time-dependent area

under the receiver operator characteristic curve, concor-

dance index (c-index), and/or Akaike’s Information Crite-

rion.

Calibration

(difference

between

observed

and

predicted event rates) is often assessed by the Hosmer-

Lemeshow statistic and improvement of prediction (or

reclassiﬁcation) is assessed via net reclassiﬁcation index

misclassiﬁcation tables or standardized net beneﬁt.

Following validation of risk-predictive capability, the

implementation phase would evaluate the beneﬁt of incor-

porating risk stratiﬁcation biomarkers in an experimental

system,

for

example,

individual-risk-stratiﬁed

HCC

screening, for outcomes including early detection, overall

survival (OS), and cost-effectiveness. This is a complex

Table 2.Outcomes, Study Design, and Analysis for Early Detection of HCC

Phases

Outcomes

Study design

Analysis

1

Exploratory TPR and FPR

Preclinical case-control study

- TPR, FPR, ROC curves to identify potential biomarkers

2

Clinical assay TPR and FPR

Case-control study

- TPR, FPR, ROC curves

- Comparison with AFP ± ultrasound

- Combinations of markers

- Impact of covariates on biomarker performance

3

Detection of preclinical HCC

PRoBE (prospective specimen

collection, retrospective

blinded evaluation) design

- TPR, FPR, ROC curves

- Comparison with AFP ± ultrasound

- Time between outcome and biomarker measurement

- Combination of markers

4

HCC detection rates

Prospective cohort

- PPV

- HCC Stage distribution

- TPR, FPR, ROC curves

- Beneﬁts (early HCC detection) and harms (false

positive rate)

- Comparison with AFP ± ultrasound

5

Decrease in HCC mortality

Randomized study

- Survival analysis and Cox regression

- Cost and quality of life

- Overdiagnosis and overtreatment

AFP, alpha-fetoprotein; FPR, false positive rate; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; PPV, positive predictive value; ROC, receiver

operating characteristics curve; TPR, true positive rate.

2574 Singal et al

Gastroenterology Vol. 160, No. 7

SPECIAL ARTICLE


problem, for which simulation analyses such as cost-

effectiveness models can be helfpul.7 Relevant variables to

consider include performance of the biomarker to stratify

HCC risk groups, HCC incidence in each risk group, costs for

medical care including the biomarker, and beneﬁts and

harms of HCC screening in each risk group. These models

can also provide information about desired biomarker

performance and costs to meet the cost-effectiveness

threshold.

There are several analytical issues that should be

considered including the following: (1) use of a continuous

risk measure versus assigning risk categories, with the

former providing more granular information but the latter

being easier to interpret by providers; (2) evaluating a

biomarker in isolation vs combining with clinical variables

as an integrative risk score, with the latter likely being

needed in light of the heterogeneity of cancer pathogenesis;

(3) accounting for changes in risk over time due to natural

disease progression or clinical interventions (eg, antiviral

therapy); and (4) optimizing risk stratiﬁcation models in

speciﬁc clinical contexts deﬁned by clinical characteristics

such as liver disease etiology. Decisions regarding these

model optimization issues must balance clinically mean-

ingful beneﬁt vs practical feasibility.

Early Detection

Rationale

HCC fulﬁlls all of the World Health Organization criteria

for a cancer screening program, including high morbidity

and mortality, an identiﬁable target population, a recog-

nizable preclinical stage, accepted recall procedures, and

efﬁcacious

treatment.

Therefore,

professional

society

guidelines

recommend

semi-annual

surveillance

using

abdominal ultrasound with or without AFP among at-risk

patients, including subgroups of patients with chronic HBV

infection and those with cirrhosis from any etiology.17,18

Ultrasound and AFP are the only 2 surveillance tests

recommended in guidelines and have been the long-

standing cornerstone of HCC surveillance. However, ultra-

sound can have highly variable performance given its

operator-dependent nature and the sensitivity of ultrasound

with AFP, at a cutoff of 20 ng/mL, for early HCC detection is

suboptimal, at only 63%.19 Evolving data also highlight the

potential for poor ultrasound visualization, particularly

among obese patients and those with NASH, as well as false

positive or indeterminate results causing screening-related

harms.20,21

Finally,

ultrasound-based

surveillance

pro-

grams often require a separate appointment, creating po-

tential barriers to adherence, contributing to underuse of

HCC surveillance in clinical practice, occurring in less than

50% across geographic regions.22,23 Overall, the limitations

of our current strategy highlight a strong need for alterna-

tive surveillance tests, particularly highly accurate blood-

based biomarkers.

Target Population

Patients with cirrhosis from any etiology comprise the

group with the highest risk for developing HCC and account

for &gt;90% of all cases in the United States and Europe,

whereas chronic HBV infection remains the most common

target population globally. Although contemporary cohorts

suggest a lower annual HCC incidence of w2%,24–26 HCC

incidence among patients with cirrhosis still exceeds the

cost-effectiveness threshold of 1.5% per year.17,18,27 Simi-

larly, annual HCC incidence in subgroups with chronic HBV

infection exceeds the cost-effectiveness threshold of 0.2%.

Therefore, patients with cirrhosis or chronic HBV infection

should be the target population for studies examining HCC

surveillance biomarkers.17 Further, surveillance studies

should be restricted to those who would potentially beneﬁt

from a therapeutic intervention. For example, surveillance is

only of beneﬁt in patients with preserved liver function, as

those with signiﬁcant hepatic decompensation (eg, Child

Pugh C cirrhosis if not eligible for liver transplantation) or

comorbidity

have

higher

competing

risk

of

non-HCC

mortality.

Patients with advanced ﬁbrosis but not cirrhosis are

known to develop HCC, but with incidence rates well below

the threshold recommended for surveillance. Biomarker

studies in HCC should not combine patients with cirrhosis

and those with advanced ﬁbrosis, as this will lead to

underestimating sample size calculations, longer accrual to

identify a sufﬁcient number of HCC cases, and ultimately

lead to biased conclusions and uncertainty if there is a

beneﬁt

of

the

new

biomarker.

If

an

accurate

risk



Figure 2. Visual summary of the natural history of HCC that focus on key differences and challenges when designing studies to

evaluate risk stratiﬁcation vs early detection biomarkers. For risk stratiﬁcation biomarkers, it is crucial to ensure that the

patients are free of HCC. This includes a 2-year period to minimize the risk of undetectable microscopic HCC, which is a

potential confounder in these studies. Used with permission from ©Mount Sinai Health System.

June 2021

Biomarker Development for HCC 2575

SPECIAL ARTICLE


stratiﬁcation biomarker can identify a subset of patients

with advanced ﬁbrosis and similar HCC risk as those with

cirrhosis, these patients may be included in early detection

trials in the future.

Study Design and Outcomes

A frequent misconception in the ﬁeld is the confusion

between early detection and diagnostic biomarkers. As tools

for cancer surveillance, early detection biomarkers will

trigger a conﬁrmatory diagnostic procedure, but per se, they

are not sufﬁcient to assign an HCC diagnosis. The appro-

priate study design and outcomes will be dependent on the

phase of biomarker development (Table 2 and Figure 3).4

Phase 1 and 2 biomarker studies. Phase 1 studies

aim to identify biomarkers and determine how well they

distinguish HCC and non-HCC controls, that is, the true

positive rate (TPR) and false positive rate (FPR). These

studies can include genes (single or array), proteins, and

radiologic tests and may start with measurement of the

biomarker at the tissue level, with or without correlation

with serum or plasma. Phase 2 is the clinical assay

development based on a specimen that can be obtained

noninvasively. Outcomes at this phase are estimation of TPR

and FPR or the receiver operating characteristics curve for

the biomarker to distinguish subjects with HCC from those

with cirrhosis but without HCC.

The same analytic principles comparing cases and con-

trols apply to phase 1 and phase 2 studies. However, phase

2 studies should be appropriately powered to not only es-

timate TPR, FPR, and area under the receiver operator

characteristic curve but also determine the impact of cova-

riates such as age, sex, etiology of liver disease, and degree

of liver dysfunction on biomarker performance. These

covariates of interest cannot be used as matching variables,

as doing so would render their effects toward null. In a

phase II study, HCC cases should be ideally restricted to

those at an early stage, either deﬁned by Barcelona Clinic

Liver Cancer (BCLC) staging system or Milan Criteria,

because the goal of HCC is detection of early-stage disease

and biomarker performance would otherwise be over-

estimated.17,18 It is at this stage that comparison with the

current standard is performed and the study should be

powered to compare the new biomarker to ultrasound with

Figure 3. Levels of evidence in biomarker studies. (Top) Main study designs, key characteristics, and levels of evidence

assigned for each design. (Bottom) Highlights the main outcomes and some key limitations of each study design. N/A, not

applicable.

2576 Singal et al

Gastroenterology Vol. 160, No. 7

SPECIAL ARTICLE


or without AFP, although it should be noted this comparison

may have bias given ultrasound and AFP were likely to

trigger diagnostic testing in a subset of the cohort.

Depending on the biomarker, one may consider subgroup

analyses of particular interest, such as among those with

NASH cirrhosis. Similarly, one could consider subgroup an-

alyses by baseline HCC risk if accurate risk stratiﬁcation

biomarkers are available in the future.

Phase 3 biomarker studies. Phase 3 studies leverage

prospective cohort studies, in which samples are collected

at regular semi-annual intervals, with the main outcome to

evaluate the ability of the biomarker to detect preclinical

HCC. The samples are stored initially and then analyzed

using the PRoBE design (prospective specimen collection,

retrospective blinded evaluation), allowing a nested case-

control analysis.28 Adequate sample size to facilitate a

sufﬁcient number of incident HCC and provide strong con-

clusions is critical, including facilitating subgroup analyses

in subpopulations of interest to help determine the impact

of covariates on the biomarker’s accuracy. Protocols should

detail specimen handling (including collection, processing,

storage, and retrieval), and there should be strict deﬁnitions

for incident HCC, per guidelines,17,18 including the use of a

multidisciplinary tumor board or adjudication committee.

Phase 3 studies should also incorporate end-of-study im-

aging or a follow-up period among non-HCC patients to

minimize risk of ascertainment bias. It is important to

identify if the biomarker will be used alone or combined

with other markers or demographic information (such as

age and sex, as has been done with GALAD).29 Based on

ultrasound and AFP performance, minimally acceptable TPR

and FPR rates for new biomarkers for early HCC detection

are approximately 65% and 10%, respectively, and these

should be measured at preclinical lag times of interest (eg,

at diagnosis, or 6 to 12 months before HCC diagnosis).

Thresholds for TPR and FPR vary by population-level HCC

risk in the local area, so strategies with higher TPR may be

desired in areas with higher HCC risk populations.

Phase 4 biomarker studies. Phase 4 studies are

prospective cohort studies in which the biomarker of in-

terest is applied to individuals in real-time and diagnostic

procedures are performed for those with a positive test. For

such studies, the assay must be reliable and reproducible,

and readily available to clinicians to make decisions for

diagnosis and treatment. There are 4 potential outcomes at

each surveillance interval: (1) the biomarker is positive and

HCC is conﬁrmed (true positive), (2) the biomarker is pos-

itive and HCC is not conﬁrmed (false positive), (3) the

biomarker is negative and HCC is discovered (false nega-

tive), and (4) the biomarker is negative and HCC is absent

(true negative). Without adequate follow-up to conﬁrm false

negatives or true negatives, positive predictive value can be

calculated after workup for test positives but sensitivity or

speciﬁcity could not be calculated. Therefore, measures such

as an additional follow-up period of 6 to 12 months with

ultrasound-based surveillance, or diagnostic computed to-

mography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in

patients with negative surveillance tests, are needed to

exclude HCC and minimize risk of ascertainment bias. Out-

comes of interest from a phase IV biomarker study include

the detection rate, that is, the proportion of cirrhotic sub-

jects who tested positive and have HCC, and false-referral

rate, that is, the proportion who have a positive surveil-

lance test but do not have HCC on diagnostic imaging. Tu-

mor characteristics including stage and any features of

tumor biology should be collected to inform power calcu-

lations for a subsequent phase 5 study.

An issue with phase 4 studies is that they can be costly

and time-consuming, thereby delaying availability of new

biomarkers for early detection of HCC. A well-performed

phase 3 study may obviate the need for a phase 4 study if

the following are present: (1) the biomarker is readily

available and reproducible, (2) phase III study accounted for

potential ascertainment bias in controls without HCC, (3)

phase III study performed longitudinal evaluation of the

biomarker in non-HCC patients to characterize FPR over

time, (4) phase III study assessed biomarker performance at

early detectable time points among HCC patients to char-

acterize TPR, and (5) phase III study provided an estimate

for mortality reduction to inform sample size calculations

for a phase 5 study. However, this approach assumes that a

positive biomarker result would have prompted a diagnostic

evaluation and the CT or MRI would have detected HCC if

present. Therefore, proceeding directly from a phase 3 to

phase 5 study should be performed with some caution,

particularly given the expense associated with phase 5

studies. Alternatively, an adaptive design could be consid-

ered, in which a randomized phase 4 study transitions to a

phase 5 study if signiﬁcant differences in tumor stage are

observed at a prespeciﬁed interim analysis. If no differences

are seen at the time of this interim analysis, the study would

be terminated given low likelihood of detecting a difference

in HCC-related mortality with continued follow-up.

Phase 5 biomarker studies. Finally, a phase 5 study

would address the question of whether surveillance using

the new biomarker reduces HCC-related mortality. Even

when HCC is detected at early stages, surveillance may not

reduce HCC-related mortality due to poor compliance and

utilization, lack of access to curative treatments, and over-

diagnosis. The design should include central randomization

to the new biomarker vs standard of care (ie, ultrasound

with or without AFP). Designing a randomized controlled

study of surveillance versus no surveillance among patients

with cirrhosis is not well accepted by providers or pa-

tients.30 The sample should be robust to allow evaluating

the primary endpoint of HCC-related mortality among all

patients. Concerns about statistical power and required

sample size make all-cause mortality reduction a difﬁcult

primary outcome. Secondary outcomes of interest include

cost, acceptance, extent of overdiagnosis and overtreatment,

and utilization. At this time, the ability to further stratify

HCC risk among cirrhosis to identify those at highest risk is

not available; however, one can consider using features such

as male sex and family history of HCC to enrich the study

cohort. The analysis would involve using survival analysis

methods for censored data to compare study arms. One can

consider computer modeling methods as a preliminary step

June 2021

Biomarker Development for HCC 2577

SPECIAL ARTICLE


for assessing the necessity for these randomized studies by

evaluating cost-effectiveness and quality of life of new sur-

veillance strategies. Performing a phase 5 study without

robust phase 3 and/or phase 4 data is not recommended

given the high cost and low likelihood of success.

Diagnosis

Rationale

As opposed to biomarkers for early HCC detection,

diagnostic biomarkers are applied in patients with a sus-

pected nodule to rule-in/out HCC and treat the patient

accordingly. The diagnosis of HCC in cirrhosis has improved

considerably, thanks to the wide implementation of nonin-

vasive imaging criteria based on contrast-enhanced CT and

MRI.17,18 In essence, patients with cirrhosis and nodules

larger than 1 cm with a speciﬁc appearance on dynamic

imaging can be conﬁdently diagnosed with HCC, with a Liver

Reporting and Data System 5 lesion having &gt;95% positive

predictive value for presence of HCC.31 These criteria have

reduced the need to perform invasive tissue biopsies for

diagnostic purposes. However, there are still clinical niches

where diagnostic biomarkers can help improve the clinical

management of patients with HCC, including those with

indeterminate nodules in the setting of cirrhosis as well as

suspicious nodules in patients in whom radiologic diagnosis

is not possible, such as those without cirrhosis or chronic

hepatitis B infection.

Target Population

Three target populations would signiﬁcantly beneﬁt

from new diagnostic biomarkers: First, patients with

cirrhosis with indeterminate liver nodules without the

hallmark radiological features on imaging (eg, LR-3 or LR-4)

have HCC risk that varies between 30% and 75% and

currently requires either a biopsy or enhanced follow-

up17,18;

second,

hepatic

nodules

detected

in

patients

without cirrhosis cannot be diagnosed radiographically and

a conﬁrmatory tissue biopsy is required; last, patients with

cirrhosis and small liver nodules (&lt;2 cm) in whom the

histological diagnosis of HCC can be challenging, particularly

differentiating well-differentiated HCC from high-grade

dysplastic nodules or intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.32

Differentiating HCC from intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma

is increasingly important given expanded treatment options

for the latter, including biomarker-selected molecular tar-

geted therapies.

Study Design and Outcomes

Despite most HCC diagnostic biomarker studies using

retrospective “convenience” samples,33 better study designs

should be considered, including cross-sectional, case-con-

trol, and prospective cohorts, particularly for newly identi-

ﬁed hepatic nodules in cirrhosis not conclusive for HCC on

imaging (Figure 3). It is crucial that the gold standard for

diagnosis is clearly speciﬁed in the study design of a novel

diagnostic biomarker. Primary outcomes should be sensi-

tivity and speciﬁcity of the candidate biomarker to diagnose

HCC. For most studies testing novel diagnostic biomarkers,

the gold standard should be either histology or noninvasive

criteria using dynamic imaging. Although patients with

typical HCC on imaging can be included to better assess

sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the new diagnostic biomarker,

histology should be the gold standard for biomarkers tested

in patients with atypical imaging features or in the absence

of cirrhosis. Notably, histology or imaging are not sufﬁcient

to exclude the diagnosis of HCC if the tumor biopsy is

negative for malignancy or if the imaging is inconclusive

given both having imperfect negative predictive value. If the

nodule is stable in size at imaging during follow-up, there is

no clear-cut length of follow-up to exclude HCC. We

recommend the use of a 2-year cutoff to exclude the diag-

nosis of HCC, as up to one-third of HCC may have a tumor

volume doubling time of more than 1 year.14,15

In the case of biomarkers to discriminate between well-

differentiated HCC and high-grade dysplastic nodules, his-

tological analysis may require surgical specimens, as needle

biopsies are sometimes suboptimal to address this diag-

nostic challenge. In these cases, independent review by at

least 2 expert liver pathologists may be required to reach a

consensus diagnosis. Glypican 3, glutamine synthase, and

HSP70 immunostaining also can be used as an aid in the

evaluation of these difﬁcult-to-diagnose lesions.34,35

Besides conventional demographic data (eg, sex and

age), additional covariates should be included in the

description of the study population, such as the degree of

liver dysfunction and inﬂammation (aspartate aminotrans-

ferase,

alanine

aminotransferase,

alkaline

phosphatase,

bilirubin, albumin, and international normalized ratio),

portal hypertension (platelet count, elastography), and the

etiology of the underlying liver disease. Studies that eval-

uate diagnostic biomarkers should clearly describe when

and how the analyte (eg, blood or tissue) was collected, as

this is critical to understand which clinical situation best

suits the new biomarker.

Prognosis

Rationale

Prognosis prediction is a crucial component in the clin-

ical management of HCC. It helps classify patients based on

survival and informs tumor staging systems. Prognostic

factors are also fundamental tools to stratify patients in

clinical trials and allow fair comparisons between the

treatment arms. As most patients with HCC have concomi-

tant liver disease, their prognosis not only depends on tu-

mor features, but also on the severity of the underlying liver

disease. Thus, HCC prognosis can be described in terms of 2

sets of variables: those derived from the tumor (eg, micro-

vascular invasion, satellite nodules, AFP levels) and those

from the nontumor liver (eg, presence of cirrhosis, portal

hypertension, and severity of liver failure).36 Some of these

features (eg, microvascular invasion, tumor satellites) can

be assessed only in surgical specimens. Currently, only

serum AFP levels have enough high-level supporting evi-

dence to be used as a biomarker in clinical practice to

2578 Singal et al

Gastroenterology Vol. 160, No. 7

SPECIAL ARTICLE


predict prognosis of patients with HCC.37 Higher AFP levels

are associated with poorer prognosis in patients at different

stages of the disease. For example, an AFP threshold of 400

ng/mL has been used to stratify patients in randomized

clinical trials, and a threshold of 1000 ng/mL has been used

to select patients unsuitable for liver transplantation in

some countries, although AFP’s prognostic value is also

observed when interpreted in a continuous manner.38,39

However, the prognostic value of serum AFP is limited, as

only a small proportion of patients have increased AFP

levels (10% of patients at early stages have AFP &gt;400 ng/

dL scaling up to 40% in advanced stages40). There are

several prognostic gene signatures associated with tumor

recurrence or survival, using both information from the

tumor and the nontumor adjacent liver.41–44 Although some

have been independently validated,41,43,45 few have been

externally evaluated in the setting of prospective studies.46

Thus, no prognostic gene signature is applied in clinical

practice and development of new prognostic biomarkers is a

clinical need.

Target Population

It is critical to have a homogeneous HCC patient popu-

lation

when

developing

novel

prognostic

biomarkers.

Therefore, studies exploring these biomarkers should follow

the BCLC staging system47 or similarly validated staging

system to select patients within a single stage and they

should receive the same treatment. This will avoid mixing

different treatment modalities and confounding the prog-

nostic performance of the biomarker. A valid alternative

would be to have enough patients in each treatment group

to adequately power subgroup analysis for biomarker

validation.

Study Design and Outcomes

Study design and data analysis should be in consonance

with the REMARK recommendations for reporting prog-

nostic biomarkers in oncology.3,48 The main steps in the

development of novel prognostic biomarkers start with the

identiﬁcation of the biomarker using a training and valida-

tion set (Figure 3). The proposed new biomarkers should

retain independent prognostic value compared with known

clinical and pathological features. The performance of the

biomarker should be validated in an external cohort, ideally

from an independent team. It is critical that the study design

ﬁts the intended clinical use of the biomarker. There are

several unique features related to HCC and the underlying

liver disease that should be considered during study design

and analysis. The best way to control for features that are

known to predict outcomes is to adjust for them in the

models, and the new biomarker should predict outcomes

independently of these factors. Variables to consider include

characteristics of the tumor (size, number, degree of cell

differentiation, microvascular invasion, satellite nodules,

presence of metastasis and macrovascular tumor invasion,

and serum AFP), the underlying liver disease (etiology,

hepatitis C virus eradication, HBV therapy, alcohol use

cessation) and degree of ﬁbrosis, severity of liver disease

and portal hypertension (platelet count, bilirubin, interna-

tional normalized ratio). Ideally, the methods used to assess

these variables should be prespeciﬁed in the protocol. It is

crucial that biomarker studies collect the analyte (eg, blood

or tissue) at the time and clinical setting when the

biomarker is intended to be used in patient decision-

making. Any modiﬁcations should be described in detail so

that the prognostic performance is not biased because of

protocol deviations.

The primary outcomes of new prognostic biomarkers

vary according to the tumor stage for which the biomarker

is designed. For instance, the primary outcome for patients

at early stage (BCLC 0/A) should be recurrence-free survival

(RFS) and OS, whereas time to recurrence could be a sec-

ondary outcome. In those patients at intermediate stage

(BCLC B) or advanced stage (BCLC C), the primary outcomes

should be OS and progression-free survival (PFS).49 The

assessment of some outcomes, especially time to recurrence

and PFS, is often biased in retrospective studies because

they are based on heterogeneous clinical practice, specif-

ically in the frequency and interval when imaging studies

are conducted. A prespeciﬁed imaging protocol (typically

performed every 6–8 weeks) and a plan for calling a tumor

recurrence are key in prospective cohort studies evaluating

novel prognostic biomarkers.

Treatment Response Prediction

Rationale

The development of predictive biomarkers in HCC has

been traditionally restricted by the inherent complexity of

its pathophysiology50 and a limited therapeutic landscape.

With 7 drugs showing survival beneﬁts in phase III clinical

trials (eg, atezolizumab plus bevacizumab, sorafenib, len-

vatinib, regorafenib, cabozantinib, ramucirumab), predictive

correlates of response and survival advantage to systemic

therapy hold the potential to improve the quality of hy-

pothesis testing in clinical trials, optimize drug development

by reducing attrition and guide clinical decision-making in

routine practice. Similarly, an expanding landscape of

locoregional therapy options now include transarterial

radioembolization and stereotactic body radiation therapy

in addition to transarterial chemoembolization. Recognizing

the growing need for molecularly based prediction of clin-

ical outcomes, this section highlights the challenges of pre-

dictive biomarker qualiﬁcation and validation and provides

a series of consensus recommendations to accelerate the

clinical translation of predictive biomarkers in HCC across

molecularly targeted agents and immune-based therapies.

The lack of need for histological conﬁrmation for an HCC

diagnosis has limited the use of diagnostic biopsies for

biomarker

development.51

Although

noninvasive

bio-

markers are expanding in HCC,52 evidence of low compli-

cation rates from tumor biopsies in clinical trials53 has

promoted acknowledgment of their importance in trial

design and clinical practice guidelines.17,18 Upfront molec-

ular stratiﬁcation has been attempted in clinical trials, but

with

limited

success

in

most

cases

(eg,

tivantinib,53

June 2021

Biomarker Development for HCC 2579

SPECIAL ARTICLE


refametinib54). Retrospective analyses of samples collected

in the context of clinical trials did not result in robust bio-

markers of response to either sorafenib37 or regorafenib.55

Currently, the only validated treatment biomarker in HCC

is high AFP level (&gt;400 ng/mL), as it predicts survival

beneﬁt to ramucirumab after a biomarker enriched phase III

trial.56

Target Population

Similar to any other clinical scenarios, studies on treat-

ment response predictive biomarkers need to be evaluated

in a homogeneous patient population, and this consensus

endorses the use of the BCLC staging system to select pa-

tients within a single tumor stage and homogeneous treat-

ment type. For predictive biomarkers, the intervention

needs to be well deﬁned and described in the study

protocol.

Study Design and Outcomes

One of the common errors when deﬁning a predictive

biomarker is to mistakenly assign treatment response

properties to a prognostic biomarker. This is generally the

case when the biomarker is shown to correlate with a

speciﬁc outcome in treated patients. However, it is key to

show the performance of the biomarker in untreated pa-

tients and calculate the signiﬁcance of interaction between

the biomarker and treatment (interaction P value). Irre-

spective of the source of human biological material consid-

ered, the roadmap for predictive biomarker development

includes veriﬁcation of analytical validity (capacity to

reproducibly detect the desired biologic trait), determina-

tion of clinical validity (adequate linkage with desired clin-

ical outcome), and clinical utility (capacity of a biomarker

testing strategy to improve patient outcomes compared

with a biomarker-unselected strategy).57

When designing studies to evaluate predictive bio-

markers, it is crucial to have a solid methodological frame-

work that acknowledges

the prognostic

heterogeneity

across BCLC stage and controls for key confounders (ie,

known prognostic factors across stage), including liver

functional reserve, AFP levels, macrovascular invasion, and

extrahepatic spread. Predictive biomarker development in

HCC has largely followed the adoption of targeted clinical

trial design, where biomarker-positivity is a prerequisite for

exposure to experimental therapies (eg, AFP and ramucir-

umab56,58). Other biomarker-driven strategies are preferred

when

conﬁdence

on

the

stratifying

potential

of

the

biomarker of choice is lower, as summarized in Figure 4.59

The

biomarker-stratiﬁed

design,

for

instance,

allows

randomization to treatment stratiﬁed by marker status,

therefore enabling evaluation of the marker/treatment

interaction across the experimental and control arms. The

interaction P value is typically a secondary objective given

limited statistical power for this outcome. In the biomarker-

based

strategy

design,

randomization

happens

before

biomarker

testing,

allowing

a

comparison

between

a

biomarker-selected population with the experimental ther-

apy versus a biomarker-unselected control population

treated with standard of care therapy. This design is optimal

to determine the clinical utility of the biomarker as a se-

lection tool for a speciﬁc therapy. Differences in costs and

sample size affect the feasibility of such approaches, with

key determinants of success being prevalence of the

biomarker and predicted magnitude of treatment effects in

the experimental and control arms. To overcome these

limitations, umbrella studies allow parallel enrollment of

patients

of

predeﬁned

molecular

subtypes,

each

arm

matched with the most appropriate molecular therapy.60

However, patient randomization in umbrella trials has a

signiﬁcant impact on feasibility, and this approach has yet to

be tested in HCC. Although exceptions are emerging in HCC

(eg, FGF19 and ﬁsogatinib61) the lack of clear actionable

drivers typical of the genomics of HCC represents an

intrinsic challenge to the delivery of precision medicine in

liver cancer.62

Similar to prognostic biomarkers, the choice of the most

appropriate outcome to qualify the clinical validity of a

biomarker is speciﬁc to stage and treatment modality and

ideally should match the primary outcome required for

regulatory approval of novel therapies.49 For early stage

(BCLC 0/A), the primary outcomes should be RFS and OS,

with secondary outcomes time to recurrence and health-

related quality of life. The development of molecular pre-

dictors of RFS after resection or ablation is expected to

facilitate risk stratiﬁcation for adjuvant therapy, mirroring

paradigmatic, clinically available examples in breast can-

cer.63 For studies testing interventions at intermediate or

advanced stages (BCLC B or C), the primary outcomes

should be OS and PFS, whereas objective response rate and

health-related quality of life should be secondary outcomes.

OS has been traditionally recommended as endpoint of

choice in patients at advanced stages because of the cyto-

static effect of most tyrosine kinase inhibitors, which led to

low objective response rates.64 However, the capacity of

immune-based

therapies

to

induce

higher

objective

response rates (between 17% and 28%65–67) has led to a

growing interest in PFS as a primary endpoint for thera-

peutic trials in these patients. A threshold of 0.6 for the

hazard ratio of PFS has been proposed as a surrogate for OS

in HCC.49,63

Rules for Incorporating New

Biomarkers in Clinical Practice

It is key to rank the level of evidence to support the

introduction of new biomarkers in clinical practice. We

endorse a modiﬁed version of the levels of evidence pro-

posed by Simon et al.16 in 2009. We have adapted these

criteria to meet the needs for biomarker development

across indications in HCC (Figure 3). Level 1 includes pro-

spective studies designed to assess the value of the

biomarker with a prespeciﬁed power calculation based on

this outcome. The biomarker of interest can be assessed

prospectively or retrospectively using archived samples, but

in retrospective studies, the analysis of the biomarker

should be prespeciﬁed in the original study protocol. In this

scenario, the study must demonstrate that biomarker

2580 Singal et al

Gastroenterology Vol. 160, No. 7

SPECIAL ARTICLE


validity (bias and type-1 error in reporting biomarker per-

formance) is not compromised using archived samples. In

other words, one would expect to get the same conclusion,

in terms of accuracy, if a prospective study would be con-

ducted speciﬁcally designed to answer the study hypothesis

for this biomarker. The key considerations are (1) the

original study protocol deﬁnes the target population for

which the new diagnostic biomarker is designed, (2) the

biomarker assay is not affected by using archived vs new

specimens, and (3) the data generated from the original

study did not inform and bias this new diagnostic biomarker

evaluation. To be considered level 1, studies using archived

samples need to fulﬁll some conditions: (1) signiﬁcant

representation of samples in relation to the patients

included in the trial, (2) robustness and reproducibility of

the assay, and (3) study design must address the intended

clinical use of the biomarker (prespeciﬁed data analysis, and

assays to be conducted blinded to clinical data). There are

examples of using retrospective samples to recommend

predictive biomarkers in oncology (ie, hormone receptor

status in breast cancer68 or KRAS mutation in colorectal

cancer69).

For level 2, the study should be prospective but does not

need to be designed to evaluate the biomarker. Prospective

cohort studies evaluating risk stratiﬁcation, early detection,

or diagnostic biomarkers can be considered as level 1. Level

3 includes multiple retrospective observational studies,

from independent investigators, using archived samples

(traditionally known as “convenience samples”). These are

specimens available to the researcher without any pre-

determined enrollment criteria. The study is designed to

estimate clinical validity of the biomarker and follows a

robust assay reproducibility framework. This also includes

retrospective sample collections without prespeciﬁed se-

lection

criteria.

Unfortunately,

the

vast

majority

of

biomarker research in HCC derives from observational

retrospective studies that test biomarker accuracy using

convenience samples.70 The target population may be het-

erogeneous due to the lack of a prespeciﬁed management

protocol or standard follow-up plan. It is unlikely that such

studies will comply with the requirements described pre-

viously when archived samples are used. In this context, the

likelihood of potential bias and spurious associations

increases.

The panel agrees on the need for level 1 evidence

studies for the incorporation of new biomarkers for

each setting in clinical practice guidelines. For studies

evaluating prognostic biomarkers, we recommend the use

of the REMARK guidelines for reporting prognostic bio-

markers in oncology.3,48 For treatment prediction bio-

markers, besides rigorous qualiﬁcation and validation, a

number of additional considerations apply to the successful

clinical implementation including cost-effectiveness and

practicality of use.71 Full regulatory approval is mandatory

for qualiﬁcation as companion diagnostics, that is, bio-

markers that are co-developed with a drug to deﬁne its

label, such as the PD-L1 IHC 22c3 pharmDx assay in lung

cancer.72

Figure 4. Biomarker-based clinical trial designs testing new therapies. Depiction of the 4 most frequently used clinical trial

designs to test the utility of biomarkers as a selection tool for new therapies. In the biomarker-based strategy, patients are

randomized to a biomarker-based strategy or no stratiﬁcation before they are allocated to the treatment arm. In the biomarker-

stratiﬁed design, patients are stratiﬁed based on the biomarker and then randomized to receive the experimental drug or

placebo. Both, patients with the biomarker and those without are included in the study. In the targeted design, only the pa-

tients with the biomarker are randomized to the drug trial (eg, trial of ramucirumab in patients with high AFP levels56). The

umbrella trial design allocates speciﬁc therapies based on predicted molecular alterations detected with the biomarker, which

generally includes an array of different molecular alterations.

June 2021

Biomarker Development for HCC 2581

SPECIAL ARTICLE


Conclusions

There is a clear need for biomarkers in HCC risk strati-

ﬁcation, early detection, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment

response.

However,

rigorous

evaluation

is

required,

extending beyond level 3 evidence, for these biomarkers to

be used in clinical practice and level 1 evidence is required

to be incorporated into practice guidelines. Ongoing efforts

such as the Hepatocellular Carcinoma Early Detection

Strategy Study and Translational Liver Cancer Consortium

are evaluating biomarkers for risk stratiﬁcation and early

detection, whereas advances in the HCC treatment land-

scape are facilitating biomarker evaluation for prognosti-

cation and treatment response. Our proposal provides

guidance for these efforts on how best to perform rigorous

biomarker evaluation in each of these areas.

References

1. Robertson DJ, Lee JK, Boland CR, et al. Recommen-

dations on fecal immunochemical testing to screen for

colorectal neoplasia: a consensus statement by the US

Multi-Society Task Force on Colorectal Cancer. Gastro-

enterology 2017;152:1217–1237.e3.

2. Hayes DF, Bast RC, Desch CE, et al. Tumor marker utility

grading system: a framework to evaluate clinical utility of

tumor markers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996;88:1456–1466.

3. McShane LM, Altman DG, Sauerbrei W, et al. Reporting

recommendations for tumor marker prognostic studies

(REMARK). J Natl Cancer Inst 2005;97:1180–1184.

4. Pepe MS, Etzioni R, Feng Z, et al. Phases of biomarker

development for early detection of cancer. J Natl Cancer

Inst 2001;93:1054–1061.

5. Fujiwara N, Friedman SL, Goossens N, et al. Risk factors

and prevention of hepatocellular carcinoma in the era of

precision medicine. J Hepatol 2018;68:526–549.

6. Moon AM, Singal AG, Tapper EB. Contemporary epide-

miology of chronic liver disease and cirrhosis. Clin

Gastroenterol Hepatol 2020;18:2650–2666.

7. Goossens N, Bian CB, Hoshida Y. Tailored algorithms for

hepatocellular carcinoma surveillance: Is one-size-ﬁts-all

strategy outdated? Curr Hepatol Rep 2017;16:64–71.

8. Rich NE, Hester C, Odewole M, et al. Racial and ethnic

differences in presentation and outcomes of hepatocel-

lular

carcinoma.

Clin

Gastroenterol

Hepatol

2019;

17:551–559.e1.

9. Athuluri-Divakar SK, Hoshida Y. Generic chemopreven-

tion of hepatocellular carcinoma. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2019;

1440:23–35.

10. Goossens N, Singal AG, King LY, et al. Cost-effective-

ness of risk score-stratiﬁed hepatocellular carcinoma

screening in patients with cirrhosis. Clin Transl Gastro-

enterol 2017;8:e101.

11. Mittal S, El-Serag HB, Sada YH, et al. Hepatocellular

carcinoma in the absence of cirrhosis in United States

veterans is associated with nonalcoholic fatty liver dis-

ease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;14:124–131.e1.

12. Loomba R, Lim JK, Patton H, et al. AGA clinical practice

update on screening and surveillance for hepatocellular

carcinoma

in

patients

with

nonalcoholic

fatty

liver

disease:

expert

review.

Gastroenterology

2020;

158:1822–1830.

13. Farhang Zangneh H, Wong WWL, Sander B, et al. Cost

effectiveness of hepatocellular carcinoma surveillance

after a sustained virologic response to therapy in pa-

tients with hepatitis C virus infection and advanced

ﬁbrosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2019;17:1840–1849.

e16.

14. Nathani P, Gopal P, Rich N, et al. Hepatocellular carci-

noma tumour volume doubling time: a systematic review

and meta-analysis. Gut 2021;70:401–407.

15. Rich NE, John BV, Parikh ND, et al. Hepatocellular car-

cinoma demonstrates heterogeneous growth patterns in

a multi-center cohort of patients with cirrhosis. Hep-

atology 2020;72:1664–1665.

16. Simon RM, Paik S, Hayes DF. Use of archived speci-

mens in evaluation of prognostic and predictive bio-

markers. J Natl Cancer Inst 2009;101:1446–1452.

17. Marrero JA, Kulik LM, Sirlin CB, et al. Diagnosis, staging,

and management of hepatocellular carcinoma: 2018

practice guidance by the American Association for the

Study of Liver Diseases. Hepatology 2018;68:723–750.

18. Galle PR, Forner A, Llovet JM, et al. EASL clinical prac-

tice guidelines: management of hepatocellular carci-

noma. J Hepatol 2018;69:182–236.

19. Tzartzeva K, Obi J, Rich NE, et al. Surveillance imaging

and alpha fetoprotein for early detection of hepatocel-

lular carcinoma in patients with cirrhosis: a meta-anal-

ysis. Gastroenterology 2018;154:1706–1718.e1.

20. Simmons O, Fetzer DT, Yokoo T, et al. Predictors of

adequate ultrasound quality for hepatocellular carcinoma

surveillance in patients with cirrhosis. Aliment Pharmacol

Ther 2017;45:169–177.

21. Atiq O, Tiro J, Yopp AC, et al. An assessment of beneﬁts

and harms of hepatocellular carcinoma surveillance in

patients with cirrhosis. Hepatology 2017;65:1196–1205.

22. Singal AG, Tiro JA, Murphy CC, et al. Patient-reported

barriers are associated with receipt of hepatocellular

carcinoma surveillance in a multi-center cohort of pa-

tients with cirrhosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;

19:987–995.e1.

23. Wolf E, Rich NE, Marrero JA, et al. Use of hepatocellular

carcinoma surveillance in patients with cirrhosis: a sys-

tematic review and meta-analysis. Hepatology 2021;

73:713–725.

24. Ioannou GN, Beste LA, Green PK, et al. Increased risk for

hepatocellular carcinoma persists up to 10 years after

HCV eradication in patients with baseline cirrhosis or

high FIB-4 Scores. Gastroenterology 2019;157:1264–

1278.e4.

25. Bertot LC, Adams LA. Trends in hepatocellular carci-

noma due to non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Expert Rev

Gastroenterol Hepatol 2019;13:179–187.

26. Ganne-Carrie N, Chaffaut C, Bourcier V, et al. Estimate of

hepatocellular carcinoma incidence in patients with

alcoholic cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2018;69:1274–1283.

27. Singal AG, Parikh ND, Hutton DW, et al. Cost effec-

tiveness of hepatocellular carcinoma surveillance: An

assessment of beneﬁts and harms. Am J Gastro 2020;

115:1642–1649.

2582 Singal et al

Gastroenterology Vol. 160, No. 7

SPECIAL ARTICLE


28. Pepe MS, Feng Z, Janes H, et al. Pivotal evaluation of the

accuracy of a biomarker used for classiﬁcation or pre-

diction: standards for study design. J Natl Cancer Inst

2008;100:1432–1438.

29. Berhane S, Toyoda H, Tada T, et al. Role of the GALAD

and BALAD-2 serologic models in diagnosis of hepato-

cellular carcinoma and prediction of survival in patients.

Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;14:875–886.e6.

30. Poustchi H, Farrell GC, Strasser SI, et al. Feasibility of

conducting a randomized control trial for liver cancer

screening: is a randomized controlled trial for liver cancer

screening feasible or still needed? Hepatology 2011;

54:1998–2004.

31. Villanueva A. Hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med

2019;380:1450–1462.

32. International

Consensus

Group

for

Hepatocellular

Neoplasia. The International Consensus Group for He-

patocellular Neoplasia. Pathologic diagnosis of early

hepatocellular carcinoma: a report of the International

Consensus Group for Hepatocellular Neoplasia. Hep-

atology 2009;49:658–664.

33. Llovet JM, Chen Y, Wurmbach E, et al. A molecular

signature to discriminate dysplastic nodules from early

hepatocellular carcinoma in HCV cirrhosis. Gastroenter-

ology 2006;131:1758–1767.

34. Tremosini S, Forner A, Boix L, et al. Prospective valida-

tion of an immunohistochemical panel (glypican 3, heat

shock protein 70 and glutamine synthetase) in liver bi-

opsies for diagnosis of very early hepatocellular carci-

noma. Gut 2012;61:1481–1487.

35. Di Tommaso L, Franchi G, Park YN, et al. Diagnostic

value of HSP70, glypican 3, and glutamine synthetase in

hepatocellular nodules in cirrhosis. Hepatology 2007;

45:725–734.

36. Kluger MD, Salceda JA, Laurent A, et al. Liver resection

for hepatocellular carcinoma in 313 Western patients:

tumor biology and underlying liver rather than tumor size

drive prognosis. J Hepatol 2015;62:1131–1140.

37. Llovet JM, Peña CEA, Lathia CD, et al. Plasma bio-

markers as predictors of outcome in patients with

advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res

2012;18:2290–2300.

38. Duvoux C, Roudot-Thoraval F, Decaens T, et al. Liver

transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma: a model

including alpha-fetoprotein improves the performance of

Milan criteria. Gastroenterology 2012;143:986–994.e3;

quiz e14–5.

39. Raoul J-L, Bruix J, Greten TF, et al. Relationship between

baseline hepatic status and outcome, and effect of sor-

afenib

on liver

function:

SHARP

trial

subanalyses.

J Hepatol 2012;56:1080–1088.

40. Montal R, Andreu-Oller C, Bassaganyas L, et al. Molec-

ular portrait of high alpha-fetoprotein in hepatocellular

carcinoma: implications for biomarker-driven clinical tri-

als. Br J Cancer 2019;121:340–343.

41. Villanueva A, Hoshida Y, Battiston C, et al. Combining

clinical, pathology, and gene expression data to predict

recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenter-

ology 2011;140:1501–1512.e2.

42. Hoshida Y, Villanueva A, Kobayashi M, et al. Gene

expression in ﬁxed tissues and outcome in hepatocel-

lular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2008;359:1995–2004.

43. Nault

J-C,

De

Reyniès

A,

Villanueva

A,

et

al.

A hepatocellular carcinoma 5-gene score associated

with survival of patients after liver resection. Gastroen-

terology 2013;145:176–187.

44. Zucman-Rossi J, Villanueva A, Nault J-C, et al. Genetic

landscape and biomarkers of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Gastroenterology 2015;149:1226–1239.e4.

45. Yamashita T, Forgues M, Wang W, et al. EpCAM and

alpha-fetoprotein expression deﬁnes novel prognostic

subtypes of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res 2008;

68:1451–1461.

46. Pinyol R, Montal R, Bassaganyas L, et al. Molecular

predictors of prevention of recurrence in HCC with sor-

afenib as adjuvant treatment and prognostic factors in

the phase 3 STORM trial. Gut 2019;68:1065–1075.

47. Forner A, Reig M, Bruix J. Hepatocellular carcinoma.

Lancet 2018;391:1301–1314.

48. Sauerbrei W, Taube SE, McShane LM, et al. Reporting

Recommendations for Tumor Marker Prognostic Studies

(REMARK): an abridged explanation and elaboration.

J Natl Cancer Inst 2018;110:803–811.

49. Llovet JM, Villanueva A, Marrero JA, et al. Trial design

and endpoints in hepatocellular carcinoma: AASLD

Consensus

Conference.

Hepatology

2021;73(Suppl

1):158–191.

50. Rebouissou S, Nault J-C. Advances in molecular clas-

siﬁcation and precision oncology in hepatocellular car-

cinoma. J Hepatol 2020;72:215–229.

51. Rimassa L, Reig M, Abbadessa G, et al. Tumor biopsy

and patient enrollment in clinical trials for advanced he-

patocellular carcinoma. World J Gastroenterol 2017;

23:2448–2452.

52. Labgaa I, Villacorta-Martin C, D’Avola D, et al. A pilot

study of ultra-deep targeted sequencing of plasma DNA

identiﬁes driver mutations in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Oncogene 2018;37:3740–3752.

53. Rimassa L, Assenat E, Peck-Radosavljevic M, et al.

Tivantinib

for

second-line

treatment

of

MET-high,

advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (METIV-HCC): a

ﬁnal analysis of a phase 3, randomised, placebo-

controlled study. Lancet Oncol 2018;19:682–693.

54. Lim HY, Merle P, Weiss KH, et al. Phase II studies with

refametinib or refametinib plus sorafenib in patients with

RAS-mutated hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res

2018;24:4650–4661.

55. Teufel M, Seidel H, Köchert K, et al. Biomarkers asso-

ciated with response to regorafenib in patients with he-

patocellular

carcinoma.

Gastroenterology

2019;

156:1731–1741.

56. Zhu AX, Kang Y-K, Yen C-J, et al. Ramucirumab after

sorafenib in patients with advanced hepatocellular car-

cinoma

and

increased

a-fetoprotein

concentrations

(REACH-2):

a

randomised,

double-blind,

placebo-

controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2019;20:282–296.

57. Teutsch SM, Bradley LA, Palomaki GE, et al. The Eval-

uation

of

Genomic

Applications

in

Practice

and

June 2021

Biomarker Development for HCC 2583

SPECIAL ARTICLE


Prevention (EGAPP) Initiative: methods of the EGAPP

Working Group. Genet Med 2009;11:3–14.

58. Zhu AX, Baron AD, Malfertheiner P, et al. Ramucirumab

as second-line treatment in patients with advanced he-

patocellular carcinoma: analysis of REACH trial results

by Child-Pugh score. JAMA Oncol 2017;3:235–243.

59. Sargent DJ, Conley BA, Allegra C, et al. Clinical trial

designs for predictive marker validation in cancer treat-

ment trials. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:2020–2027.

60. Kim ES, Herbst RS, Wistuba II, et al. The BATTLE trial:

personalizing therapy for lung cancer. Cancer Discov

2011;1:44–53.

61. Kim RD, Sarker D, Meyer T, et al. First-in-human Phase I

study of ﬁsogatinib (BLU-554) validates aberrant ﬁbro-

blast growth factor 19 signaling as a driver event in he-

patocellular carcinoma. Cancer Discov 2019;9:1696–

1707.

62. Schulze K, Nault J-C, Villanueva A. Genetic proﬁling of

hepatocellular

carcinoma

using

next-generation

sequencing. J Hepatol 2016;65:1031–1042.

63. Duffy MJ, Harbeck N, Nap M, et al. Clinical use of bio-

markers in breast cancer: updated guidelines from the

European Group on Tumor Markers (EGTM). Eur J Can-

cer 2017;75:284–298.

64. Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, et al. Sorafenib in

advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2008;

359:378–390.

65. Finn RS, Qin S, Ikeda M, et al. Atezolizumab plus bev-

acizumab in unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma.

N Engl J Med 2020;382:1894–1905.

66. El-Khoueiry AB, Sangro B, Yau T, et al. Nivolumab in

patients

with

advanced

hepatocellular

carcinoma

(CheckMate

040):

an

open-label,

non-comparative,

phase 1/2 dose escalation and expansion trial. Lancet

2017;389:2492–2502.

67. Zhu AX, Finn RS, Edeline J, et al. Pembrolizumab in

patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma previ-

ously treated with sorafenib (KEYNOTE-224): a non-

randomised, open-label phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol

2018;19:940–952.

68. Jensen EV, Block GE, Smith S, et al. Estrogen receptors

and breast cancer response to adrenalectomy. Natl

Cancer Inst Monogr 1971;34:55–70.

69. Lievre A, Bachet JB, Le Corre D, et al. KRAS mutation

status is predictive of response to cetuximab therapy in

colorectal cancer. Cancer Res 2006;66:3992–3995.

70. Hoshida Y, Moeini A, Alsinet C, et al. Gene signatures in

the management of hepatocellular carcinoma. Semin

Oncol 2012;39:473–485.

71. Nalejska E, Ma

Î

czy�nska E, Lewandowska MA. Prognostic

and

predictive

biomarkers:

tools

in

personalized

oncology. Mol Diagn Ther 2014;18:273–284.

72. Sul J, Blumenthal GM, Jiang X, et al. FDA approval

summary: pembrolizumab for the treatment of patients

with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer whose tumors

express programmed death-ligand 1. Oncologist 2016;

21:643–650.

Author names in bold designate shared co-ﬁrst authorship.

Received September 10, 2020. Accepted January 15, 2021.

Correspondence

Address correspondence to: Amit G. Singal, MD, MS, Division of Digestive and

Liver Diseases, UT Southwestern Medical Center, 5959 Harry Hines Boulevard,

POB

1,

Suite

420,

Dallas,

Texas

75390–8887.

e-mail:

amit.singal@utsouthwestern.edu; fax: 214-645-6114; or Augusto Villanueva,

MD, PhD, 1425 Madison Avenue, Box 1123, Room 11-70E, New York, New

York 10029. e-mail: augusto.villanueva@mssm.edu.

Conﬂict of interest

Amit G. Singal has served as a consultant for Wako Diagnostics, Glycotest,

Exact

Sciences,

Roche,

GRAIL,

Genentech,

Bayer,

Eisai,

Exelixis,

AstraZeneca, BMS, and TARGET Pharmasolutions. Yujin Hoshida has served

as

advisory

board

member

for

Helio

Health,

consultant

for

Ferring

Pharmaceuticals,

research

funding

from

Morphic

Therapeutics,

and

shareholder of Alentis Therapeutics. David J. Pinato received lecture fees

from ViiV Healthcare, Bayer Healthcare and travel expenses from BMS and

Bayer Healthcare; consulting fees for Mina Therapeutics, EISAI, Roche, Astra

Zeneca; received research funding (to institution) from MSD, BMS. Jorge

Marrero has served as a consultant for Glycotest. Jean-Charles Nault

received a research grant from Bayer for Inserm UMR1148. Young Suk Lim

is an advisory board member of Bayer Healthcare and Gilead Sciences and

received investigator-initiated research funding from Bayer Healthcare and

Gilead

Sciences.

Ziding

Feng

received

research

funding

from

Exact

Sciences. Anna S. Lok serves on the advisory board of Epigenomics. Josep

Llovet receives research support from Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals,

Bristol-Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eisai Inc, and Ipsen; and

received

consulting

fees

from

AstraZeneca,

Bayer

HealthCare

Pharmaceuticals,

Bristol-Myers

Squibb,

Can-Fite

Biopharma,

Celsion

Corporation, Eli Lilly, Eisai Inc, Exelixis, Genentech, Glycotest, Merck,

Nucleix, and Roche. Augusto Villanueva receives consulting fees from

Guidepoint, Fujiﬁlm, Boehringer Ingelheim, FirstWord, and MHLife Sciences;

advisory board fees from Exact Sciences, Nucleix, Gilead, and NGM

Pharmaceuticals; and research support from Eisai. The remaining authors

disclose no conﬂicts.

Funding

Amit G. Singal’s research is supported in part by National Cancer Institute U01

CA230694, R01 CA222900, and U01 CA226052. Yujin Hoshida’s research is

supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (CA233794, CA226052),

European Commission (ERC-2014-AdG-671231), Cancer Prevention and

Research Institute of Texas (RR180016). David J. Pinato is supported by the

Wellcome Trust Strategic Fund (PS3416), Cancer Research UK (Postdoctoral

Bursary

Grant

C57701/A26137),

and

the

Conquer

Cancer,

the

ASCO

Foundation

(Young

Investigator

Award

2019)

and

acknowledges

infrastructural support by the Cancer Research UK Imperial Centre and the

Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre. Ziding Feng is supported in part by

NIH U24CA230144 and U24CA086368. Nabihah Tayob is supported in part

by NIH R01CA230503, U24CA230144, R01CA222900, and U01CA230694.

Anna S. Lok is supported in part by NIH U01CA230669 and R01CA230503.

Josep Llovet. acknowledges funding from the Accelerator Award (CRUCK,

AEEC, AIRC) (HUNTER, Ref. C9380/A26813), National Cancer Institute (P30-

CA196521), US Department of Defense (CA150272P3), Samuel Waxman

Cancer Research Foundation, Spanish National Health Institute (PID2019-

105378RB-100),

and

the

Generalitat

de

Catalunya/AGAUR

(SGR-1358).

Augusto

Villanueva

is

supported

by

the

US

Department

of

Defense

(CA150272). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does

not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial views of NIH. The funding agency had

no role in design and conduct of the study; collection, management,

analysis, and interpretation of the data; or preparation of the manuscript.

2584 Singal et al

Gastroenterology Vol. 160, No. 7

SPECIAL ARTICLE

